Leibniz:
Nature and Freedom

Donald Rutherford
J. A. Cover,
Editors

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

LEIBNIZ

This page intentionally left blank

LEIBNIZ
Nature and Freedom

EDITED BY

Donald Rutherford and J. A. Cover

1

2005

1
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
Oxford University’s objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam

Copyright # 2005 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Leibniz : nature and freedom / edited by Donald Rutherford and J.A. Cover.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13 978-0-19-514374-4; 978-0-19-514375-1 (pbk.)
ISBN 0-19-514374-4; 0-19-514375-2 (pbk.)
1. Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, Freiherr von, 1646–1716.
2. Free will and determinism.
3. Philosophy of nature.
I. Rutherford, Donald, 1957–
II. Cover, J. A. (Jan A.), 1958–
B2599 .F7L45 2005
193—dc22
2004050094

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

For R. C. Sleigh, Jr.
Teacher, Colleague, Friend

This page intentionally left blank

Preface

This volume of new essays is intended to provide a timely picture of the current
state of scholarship on Leibniz’s metaphysics. We are grateful to the authors for
contributing to the collection. We would also like to thank Daniel Garber and
Robert M. Adams for their sound advice in the early stages of the project; Matthew
Kisner, for his assistance in preparing the typescript for publication; and Peter
Ohlin of Oxford University Press, for his enthusiasm and patience. Finally, we are
especially thankful to Madeleine Picciotto and Karen Cover, for their inextinguishable good humor and support in the face of challenges to completing this
project: overcommitment, physical injury, and stubbornness.
The contributions of Robert C. Sleigh, Jr., to Leibniz scholarship have and
continue to set a benchmark for a generation of students and researchers in the
history of early modern philosophy. Those who read his work are fortunate to have
him as a fellow philosopher; those who have studied with him are lucky to have him
as a mentor; those who know him are blessed to have him as a friend. We dedicate
this volume to Bob in fondness and gratitude.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

Contributors
Abbreviations

xi
xiii

Introduction 3
Donald Rutherford and J. A. Cover
1.

The One and the Many and Kinds of Distinctness: The Possibility
of Monism or Pantheism in the Young Leibniz
Mark Kulstad 20

2.

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity
Christia Mercer 44

3.

Leibniz on Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World
Samuel Levey 69

4.

Leibniz and Idealism
Daniel Garber 95

5.

Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation
Catherine Wilson 108

6. Leibniz and Occasionalism
Nicholas Jolley 121
7.

Leibniz’s Two Realms
Jonathan Bennett 135

8.

Leibniz on Spontaneity
Donald Rutherford 156

9. Moral Necessity
Robert Merrihew Adams
10.

181

Spontaneity and Freedom in Leibniz
Michael J. Murray 194

x Contents
11.

Leibniz Against Molinism: Freedom, Indifference, and the
Nature of the Will
Sean Greenberg 217

12. Video Meliora Proboque, Deteriora Sequor: Leibniz on the Intellectual
Source of Sin
Jack D. Davidson 234
Bibliography
Index 263

255

Contributors

ROBERT MERRIHEW ADAMS is a senior member of the Faculty of Philosophy,
Oxford University.
JONATHAN BENNETT is retired and lives on an island near Vancouver, B.C.
J. A. COVER is Professor of Philosophy at Purdue University.
JACK D. DAVIDSON is Visiting Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the University of
Memphis.
DANIEL GARBER is Professor of Philosophy at Princeton University.
SEAN GREENBERG is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Johns Hopkins University.
NICHOLAS JOLLEY is Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Irvine.
MARK KULSTAD is Professor of Philosophy at Rice University.
SAMUEL LEVEY is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Dartmouth College.
CHRISTIA MERCER is Professor of Philosophy at Columbia University.
MICHAEL J. MURRAY is Professor of Philosophy at Franklin and Marshall College.
DONALD RUTHERFORD is Professor of Philosophy at the University of California,
San Diego.
CATHERINE WILSON is Professor of Philosophy at the University of British Columbia.

This page intentionally left blank

Abbreviations

(citations by page number unless otherwise indicated)
A

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe. Ed. Deutsche
Akademie der Wissenschaften. Darmstadt, Leipzig, Berlin: Akademie Verlag,
1923–. Cited by series, volume, page.

AG

G. W. Leibniz. Philosophical Essays. Ed. and trans. Roger Ariew and Daniel
Garber. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1989.

Ak

Immanuel Kant. Gesammelte Schriften. Ed. Akademie der Wissenshaften.
Berlin: Reimer (later De Gruyter), 1910–. Cited by volume and page number.

AT

Oeuvres de Descartes. Ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery. Paris: J. Vrin,
1964–74. Cited by volume and page.

C

Opuscules et fragments inédits de Leibniz. Ed. Louis Couturat. Paris: Presses
Universitaires, 1903. Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1966.

CSM

The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. Ed. and trans. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff, Dugald Murdoch, and (vol. 3) Anthony Kenny. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1984, 1985, 1991. Cited by volume and page.

CWS

The Collected Works of Spinoza. Vol. 1. Ed. and trans. Edwin Curley. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985.

DM

G. W. Leibniz. Discours de Métaphysique. Cited by section as in G 4:427–
463. English trans. in AG, L, and WFPT.

DSR

G. W. Leibniz. De Summa Rerum. Metaphysical Papers, 1675–1676. Ed. and
trans. G.H.R. Parkinson. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992.

xiv Abbreviations
E

G. W. Leibniz. Opera Philosophicae quae exstant Latina, Gallica, Germanica
omnia. Ed. J. E. Erdmann. Berlin: Eichler, 1839–40. Reprint, Aalen: Scientia
Verlag, 1974.

Enquiry

David Hume. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. L. A. SelbyBigge and P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975.

Essay

John Locke. An Essay concerning Human Understanding. Ed. Peter H.
Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975. Cited by book, chapter, and
section.

Ethics

Baruch Spinoza. Ethica. Roman numerals refer to parts; A: axiom; P: Proposition; D (following roman numeral): deﬁnition; Arabic numerals refer to
axioms, propositions, deﬁnitions etc.; D (following P and arabic numeral):
demonstration of a proposition; C, S, L: corollary, scholium, and lemma
respectively; Post, Exp, Pref, and App: Postulate, Explanation, Preface, and
Appendix. English trans. in CWS.

G

Die philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Ed. C. I.
Gerhardt. Berlin: Weidmann, 1875–90. Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms,
1978. Cited by volume and page.

GLW

Briefwechsel zwischen Leibniz und Christian Wolff. Ed. C. I. Gerhardt. Halle:
Schmidt, 1860. Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1963.

GM

Leibnizens Mathematische Schriften. Ed. C. I. Gerhardt. Berlin: A. Asher;
and Halle: H. W. Schmidt, 1849–63. Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1971.
Cited by volume and page.

Grua

Textes inédits d’après des manuscrits de la Bibliothèque provinciale d’Hanovre.
Ed. Gaston Grua. Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1948. Reprint, New York:
Garland, 1985.

H

G. W. Leibniz. Theodicy. Trans. E. M. Huggard. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1952. Reprint, LaSalle, Ill: Open Court, 1985.

L

G. W. Leibniz. Philosophical Papers and Letters. Ed. and trans. Leroy E.
Loemker. 2nd ed. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1969.

LA

The Leibniz-Arnauld Correspondence. Ed. and trans. H. T. Mason. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1967. Reprint, New York: Garland,
1985.

LC

The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence. Ed. H. G. Alexander. Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 1956, following Clarke’s 1717 English translation.
Cited by letter and section.

LBr

Der Briefwechsel des Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in der Königlichen Öffentlichen Bibliothek zu Hannover. Ed. Eduard Bodemann. Hannover: Hahn, 1895.
Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1966. Cited by Bodemann’s numbering.

Abbreviations

xv

LH

Die Leibniz-Handschriften der Königlichen Öffentlichen Bibliothek zu Hannover. Ed. Eduard Bodemann. Hannover: Hahn, 1889. Reprint, Hildesheim:
Georg Olms, 1966. Cited by Bodemann’s numbering.

LOC

G. W. Leibniz. The Labyrinth of the Continuum: Writings on the Continuum
Problem, 1672–1686. Ed. and trans. Richard T. W. Arthur. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2001.

LR

G. W. Leibniz. Discours de métaphysique et correspondance avec Arnauld. Ed.
Georges Le Roy. Paris: Vrin, 1970.

Mon

G. W. Leibniz. Monadology. Cited by section as in G 6:607–623. English
translation in AG, L, and WFPT.

MP

G. W. Leibniz. Philosophical Writings. Ed. and trans. Mary Morris and
G.H.R. Parkinson. London: Dent, 1973.

NE

G. W. Leibniz. Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement humain. Cited by book,
chapter, and section as in A, ser. 6, vol. 6. Translated in RB.

OM

Oeuvres completes de Malebranche. Edited by Andre Robinet. 20 vols., plus
‘‘Index des citations’’ and ‘‘Index general.’’ Paris: Vrin, 1958–84. Cited by
volume and page.

PLP

G. W. Leibniz. Logical Papers. Ed. and trans. G.H.R. Parkinson. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1966.

PNG

G. W. Leibniz. Principes de la Nature et de la Grâce, Fondés en Raison.
Cited by section as in G 6:598–606. English translation in AG, L, and
WFPT.

Principles

Rene Descartes. Principia Philosophiae. Cited by part and article, as found in
AT, vol. 8, and CSM, vol. 1.

RB

G. W. Leibniz. New Essays on Human Understanding. Ed. and trans. Peter
Remnant and Jonathan Bennett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1981. Cited by page that corresponds to A, ser. 6, vol. 6.

S

G. W. Leibniz. Monadology and Other Essays. Ed. and trans. P and A. M.
Schrecker. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965.

ST

St. Thomas Aquinas. Summa Theologiae. Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores
Cristianos 1955–1958. Cited by part, question, and article.

T

G. W. Leibniz. Essais de Theodicée. Cited by section number as in G 6:21–
471; ‘‘a’’ refers to the ‘‘Abrege’’ and is cited by objection number; ‘‘pd,’’
‘‘h,’’ ‘‘k,’’ and ‘‘cd’’ precede section numbers of the ‘‘Discours Préliminaire,’’ the ‘‘Reﬂexions’’ on Hobbes, ‘‘Remarques’’ on King’s volume
The Origin of Evil, and ‘‘Causa Dei,’’ respectively. Translated (minus
‘‘Causa Dei’’) in H.

xvi Abbreviations
Treatise

David Hume. A Treatise on Human Nature. Ed. David Fate Norton and
Mary J. Norton. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

WF

Leibniz’s ‘‘New System’’ and Associated Contemporary Texts. Ed. and trans.
R. S. Woolhouse and Richard Francks. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997.

WFPT

G. W. Leibniz: Philosophical Texts. Ed. and trans. R. S. Woolhouse and
Richard Francks. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

LEIBNIZ

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction
DONALD RUTHERFORD

AND

J. A. C O V E R

or much of the twentieth century the dominant interpretation of Leibniz’s

F philosophy was that framed in the pioneering studies of Bertrand Russell

(1900) and Louis Couturat (1901).1 Although differing in details, the accounts of
Russell and Couturat both presented Leibniz’s philosophy as a development of his
logic, in particular, his formulation of the principle of sufﬁcient reason as a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for truth: in every true proposition, necessary or
contingent, the concept of the predicate is contained in the concept of the subject.
From this principle, Couturat argued, follow all of the main theses of Leibniz’s
metaphysics: the identity of indiscernibles, the complete concept theory of substance, the doctrine of expression, the hypothesis of preestablished harmony, the
ideality of space and time.2 Russell expressed greater skepticism than Couturat
about the success of Leibniz’s philosophical program. Where Couturat found in
Leibniz’s writings a consistent expression of a rationalist metaphysics he labeled
‘‘panlogism’’ (Couturat 1901: xi), Russell stressed the way in which Leibniz’s rationalism led to a conclusion that Leibniz himself could not countenance: the
necessary existence of all ﬁnite things (Russell 1900: 183). Despite regarding this
conclusion as decisive grounds for rejecting Spinoza’s philosophy, Leibniz was—in
Russell’s judgment—trapped by his own starting points into a similar form of
necessitarianism.
The Russell-Couturat interpretation spurred the investigations of several
generations of scholars who endeavored to elaborate the details of Leibniz’s system
and to respond to the difﬁculties that Russell had located in it. Foremost among
these is the problem of contingency, which goes to the heart of Leibniz’s metaphysics and has decisive consequences for his moral philosophy and theology. The
latter areas of Leibniz’s thought, however, received comparatively little attention
from scholars during this period.3 For the most part their energies were devoted to
analyzing metaphysical problems—concerning necessity and contingency, truth,
identity, and substance—in isolation from the historical context in which they
engaged Leibniz and their systematic connections to other parts of his philosophy.
3

4 Introduction

Representative is the comparative neglect of the topic of freedom, identiﬁed by
Leibniz as one of the ‘‘two famous labyrinths’’ in which reason is prone to become
entangled (G 6:29/H 53). Although the problem of contingency was primarily of
interest to Leibniz because of its ramiﬁcations for divine and human freedom, the
latter topics did not become a focus of English-language scholarship until the 1970s,
and only recently have historians of philosophy begun to explore the complex
theological landscape within which freedom was such a hotly contested issue during the seventeenth century.4
The past thirty years have witnessed a renaissance in Leibniz studies.5 With
increasing regularity scholars have recognized the importance of adopting a synoptic approach to Leibniz’s philosophy, interpreting its various branches (logic,
metaphysics, ethics) in relation to each other and to other areas of his thought
(mathematics, physics, jurisprudence, theology). At the same time there has been a
newfound sensitivity to developmental questions. Rejecting the assumption that
Leibniz defends a single, unchanging set of philosophical views throughout his
life, commentators have distinguished an early, middle, and late Leibniz, and have
debated the consistency—synchronic and diachronic—of the positions he articulates within these periods.6 Finally, there has been a growing awareness of the need
to interpret Leibniz’s views within the larger context of seventeenth-century intellectual life and to accommodate within such readings Leibniz’s own understanding of his relationship to the history of philosophy.
To a degree unusual among seventeenth-century philosophers, Leibniz was
eager to highlight the afﬁnity between his views and those of his predecessors—
ancient, medieval, and modern. Basic to his approach is the goal of establishing
agreement between his positions and those of other philosophers, pursuing in this
way a vein of truth that has been only slowly and incompletely extracted over
millenia. Leibniz’s embrace of this goal has its roots in theology. He is convinced
that there is a single source of truth, the divine intellect, to which all philosophers
have had access, and he is committed to locating agreement among rival factions
wherever possible. In a late letter to Nicolas Remond, he writes:
I have tried to uncover and unite the truth buried and scattered under the
opinions of all the different philosophical sects, and I believe I have added
something of my own which takes a few steps forward. . . . I have found that most of
the sects are right in a good part of what they propose, but not so much in what
they deny. (G 3:605/L 654–655)7

Leibniz emphasizes that his own philosophy has been able to unite elements of
truth from apparently irreconcilable alternatives (e.g., Aristotelianism and mechanism, or the Jansenist and Jesuit positions on freedom). Yet there are limits
beyond which even he is not prepared to go. In the case of two prominent contemporaries, Hobbes and Spinoza, Leibniz ﬁnds their doctrines supported by
principles that are objectionable at such a fundamental level that there can be no
hope of accommodation, even if evidence suggests that in his youth Leibniz was
strongly inﬂuenced by their writings. This anomaly offers an important clue to the
deeper motivations of Leibniz’s philosophy, and a point around which to organize
a historically informed account of his views.

Introduction

5

The Threat of Naturalism
The philosophies of Hobbes and Spinoza exemplify a trend in modern philosophy
that Leibniz labels ‘‘naturalism.’’ In a late commentary on Spinoza’s writings, he
singles out Proposition 16 of Part 1 of the Ethics as a source for this doctrine: ‘‘From
the necessity of the divine nature there must follow inﬁnitely many things in
inﬁnitely many ways (that is, everything which can fall under inﬁnite intellect).’’
‘‘This view,’’ Leibniz argues, ‘‘is quite false, and makes the same mistake that
Descartes insinuated, that matter successively accepts all shapes. Spinoza begins
where Descartes leaves off: in naturalism’’ (AG 277).8 As Leibniz characterizes it,
the fundamental error of naturalism is its conception of God as an inﬁnite power
whose effects are expressed necessarily, without the exercise of wisdom or choice.
‘‘As far as one can understand [Spinoza],’’ Leibniz writes in the Theodicy, ‘‘he
acknowledges no goodness in God, properly speaking, and he teaches that all
things exist through the necessity of the divine nature, without any act of choice by
God’’ (T 173). Such a conception of God threatens the heart of Leibniz’s philosophical project, which seeks to comprehend the existence of all ﬁnite things in
terms of their creation by a supremely wise and good God, whose justice is exhibited in his realization of the best of all possible worlds. The contingency of
the world’s existence is an essential feature of Leibniz’s picture. If there were only
one world that could exist, or if God’s power entailed the existence of all possible
worlds, then the foundations of Leibniz’s theodicy would be undermined. There
would be no way to defend God as a creator who exhibits justice in his actions,
and who serves as a model for the agency of created rational beings. Furthermore,
if the existence of the world and its constituents were necessitated by God’s action, then the claim of human beings to act freely would be compromised. The
price to be paid by naturalism, therefore, is high: not only do we lose a conception
of God as a fundamentally moral agent, but we also sacriﬁce the conditions for
moral agency on the part of created rational beings.
An early text by Leibniz ﬂeshes out this picture of naturalism by linking it to
the revival of the teachings of the two principal schools of Hellenistic philosophy:
‘‘There are two sects of naturalists fashionable today which have their source in
antiquity; the one revives the opinions of Epicurus and the other is, in fact,
composed of Stoics’’ (G 7:333/AG 281). Leibniz associates the revival of Epicureanism with the views of Hobbes: ‘‘Epicurus in times past, and Hobbes today, who
hold all things to be corporeal, have given enough evidence to show that, on their
view, there is no providence’’ (G 7:333/AG 282). According to Epicureans and their
modern followers, any substance, including the soul and God himself, is composed
of extended matter.9 If this is so, then God can be neither all-powerful nor allknowing; hence the case for God’s providence and justice cannot be made.
The materialism of Hobbes and the Epicureans is one of the earliest targets
of Leibniz’s criticism and a stimulus for his own efforts to preserve a place in
nature for incorporeal, form-like principles. His objections to the teachings of
what he calls ‘‘the sect of the new Stoics,’’ associated with Descartes and Spinoza,
take a different tack. For these philosophers, he allows, there may be incorporeal

6 Introduction

substances, including God and human souls. Nevertheless, these ‘‘new Stoics’’
reduce God’s status to that of the soul of the world, or its ‘‘primary power,’’ which is
determined to act by a blind necessity. Thus, in their case, too, divine justice is
jeopardized. Against Spinoza, this charge is well founded.10 But how, one wonders,
can Leibniz justify it in the case of Descartes, who goes to such lengths to defend the
idea of God as a transcendent, supremely perfect being? Here Leibniz is certainly
taking some liberty, but he reasons that the inner logic of Descartes’ philosophy
leads him to a position that is—in its theological and moral consequences—
indistinguishable from that of Spinoza. While Descartes afﬁrms God’s omnipotence and supreme goodness, his understanding of the former precludes viewing
God as a just creator. In support of this conclusion Leibniz cites Descartes’ doctrine
of the creation of eternal truths, which he takes to imply the absence of objective standards against which to evaluate the justice of God’s action, and his pronouncement in Part 3 of the Principles of Philosophy that matter successively takes
on all possible forms, which Leibniz takes to preclude the claim that nature always
operates in the best, or ‘‘ﬁttest,’’ manner.11 For these reasons, Leibniz concludes,
Descartes’ God, or perfect being, is not a God like the one we imagine or hope for,
that is, a God just and wise, doing everything possible for the good of creatures.
Rather, Descartes’ God is something approaching the God of Spinoza, namely,
the principle of things and a certain supreme power or primitive nature that puts
everything into motion and does everything that can be done. (G 4:299/AG 242)

The fundamental threat of naturalism, as Leibniz sees it, lies in its rejection of
an understanding of God as a wise and just creator, acting for the sake of intelligible ends. By reducing God’s role to that of an ultimate causal power, whose
effects are expressed necessarily, naturalists reject the search for features of harmony and design in nature. Nature is as it is necessarily and not as a creator has
intended it to be. Naturalism thus poses a direct challenge to traditional theological conceptions of the order of nature and of the place of human beings in
nature. If God is not a wise and just creator in whose image human beings have
been made, then there seems to be no special place reserved for human beings in
nature, nor can human beings look to God for moral principles on which they may
rely in governing their actions.

Nature and Natures
These are conclusions that Spinoza openly embraces in the Ethics: human beings
are to be understood as a part of nature, obeying the same necessary laws as other
ﬁnite things. In the Preface to Part 3, Spinoza complains that ‘‘most of those who
have written about the affects, and men’s way of living, seem to treat, not of natural
things, which follow the common laws of nature, but of things which are outside
nature. Indeed they seem to conceive man in nature as a dominion within a
dominion’’ (CWS 491). The target of Spinoza’s criticism is the common view of
human beings as both a part of nature and hence subject to natural laws, and at the
same time superior to nature and capable of acting in ways that are not constrained

Introduction

7

by its laws. The view ﬁnds its sharpest expression in Descartes’ philosophy where
human nature is cleanly dissected into the ontologically distinct essences of mind
and body. Bodies act according to necessary laws of motion. Minds, which are
present only in human beings, possess essential powers of reason and freedom on
the basis of which it is concluded that ‘‘man disturbs, rather than follows, the order
of nature, that he has absolute power over his actions, and that he is determined
only by himself ’’ (CWS 491).
Leibniz’s philosophy can be read as an attempt to ﬁnd a middle way between
the extremes of Spinoza’s naturalism, which limits human nature to the effects of
necessary universal laws, and Descartes’ dualism, which preserves the uniqueness
of human beings by positing within them a substance, res cogitans, whose actions
‘‘disturb, rather than follow, the order of nature.’’ In staking out this middle
ground, Leibniz is led to defend his own version of a naturalistic theory of human
beings, albeit one that is consistent with their creation by a wise and good God.
According to Leibniz, divine wisdom requires creation of a world that is intrinsically intelligible, a condition that is met by ensuring that every being is endowed
with a nature whose powers are sufﬁcient to account for all of its effects. Leibniz’s
naturalism is speciﬁcally intended to rule out the possibility that physical or psychological phenomena are in any way miraculous, that is, that they occur in a way
that could be explained only by appeal to a direct intervention by God, or to
‘‘occult powers’’ that lie beyond the reach of reason. Instead, all natural phenomena can be explained in terms of the action of powers inherent in the natures
of created substances.
Like Spinoza, Leibniz ﬁnds Descartes’ dualism beset by conceptual problems,
particularly Descartes’ failure to explain the mind’s ability to ‘‘disturb’’ the universal laws that govern the motion of matter. By virtue of what does mind have the
power to move matter, and to do so in a way that routinely violates fundamental
laws such as the conservation of momentum? Leibniz’s answer is that such problems can be avoided only if it is assumed from the start that mind and body do not
stand in real causal relations to each other: mind cannot causally interact with
matter, nor matter with mind.
Up to this point Leibniz agrees with the conclusion drawn by Nicolas Malebranche, who develops Descartes’ philosophy in a system in which no ﬁnite thing
operates as a true cause. As Malebranche would have it, causal power is exercised
by God alone, who produces successive coordinated changes in the states of minds
and bodies that leave the impression of direct causal interaction between them (both
body-body and mind-body causation). Leibniz, however, rejects Malebranche’s occasionalism, seeking instead to preserve the identity of created substances as causal
agents capable of bringing about changes in their own states. Against the thesis that
God is responsible for all real change in the world, Leibniz defends what he calls
the ‘‘system of concurrence,’’ or ‘‘preestablished harmony,’’ according to which
God creates minds and bodies such that each, through the exercise of its own
powers, in accordance with laws proper to its nature, brings about successive effects
that are coordinated with one another. The impression that the mind is capable of
directly causing changes in the body is, as Malebranche holds, an illusion; however, against Malebranche, Leibniz insists that subsequent changes in the states of

8 Introduction

both mind and body are the product of actions internal to each—actions that God,
as a supremely wise creator, has chosen to harmonize with each other. As Leibniz
makes clear in his 1695 essay New System of the Nature and Communication of
Substances, it is basic to his theory that the agreement of soul and body and the
changes internal to each can be explained naturally, in terms of the exercise of
powers inherent in the substances themselves:
[W]hy should God not be able to give a substance, from the beginning a nature or
an internal force that can produce in it, in an orderly way (as would happen in a
spiritual or formal automaton, but free in the case where it has a share of reason),
everything that will happen to it, that is, all the appearances or expressions it will
have, without the help of any created being? This is especially so since the nature
of substance necessarily requires and essentially involves progress or change,
without which it would not have the force to act. And since this nature that
pertains to the soul is representative of the universe in a very exact manner (though
more or less distinctly), the series of representations produced by the soul will
correspond naturally to the series of changes in the universe itself, just as the body,
in turn, has also been accommodated to the soul for the situations in which the
soul is thought to act externally. (G 4:485/AG 144)

Leibniz’s efforts to distance himself from Descartes’ interactionism place
him on a course parallel to that charted by Spinoza in the Ethics. Accepting
that the fundamental difference between the properties of mind and body precludes their causal interaction, Spinoza defends a position that anticipates
Leibniz’s preestablished harmony.12 Bodies and minds do not inﬂuence each
other’s states causally. Modes of extension (bodies) interact causally with other
modes of extension in accordance with laws of motion; modes of thought (ideas/
minds) interact causally with other modes of thought in accordance with psychological laws. Nevertheless, Spinoza insists that these two independent causal
orders agree perfectly with each other: ‘‘The order and connection of ideas is the
same as the order and connection of things’’ (IIP7). His demonstration of this
proposition, however, proceeds very differently from Leibniz’s defense of the superﬁcially similar thesis of preestablished harmony. Where Leibniz regards preestablished harmony as the result of God’s intelligent design of a universe in which
the autonomous causal powers of soul and body are providentially aligned, Spinoza’s
doctrine of parallelism is a consequence of the necessary and unitary order of
reality, in which God and nature are one in substance. The causal order of bodies
is God’s own inﬁnite power expressed through inﬁnite modes of extension, and
the causal order of ideas is that same power expressed through inﬁnite modes of
thought.
For Spinoza, all causal power is ultimately the power of God, the one substance from whose necessary existence there necessarily follow ‘‘inﬁnitely many
things in inﬁnitely many ways.’’ Malebranche’s insistence that God is the sole true
cause of all that happens in the world brings him, in Leibniz’s opinion, perilously
close to Spinoza’s position. Although Malebranche is adamant that God is a
transcendent being, who creates and conserves a world of separate, ﬁnite substances, Leibniz questions whether Malebranche’s occasionalism allows him to
uphold such a view. As Leibniz sees it, in denying to ﬁnite things an internal

Introduction

9

principle of action sufﬁcient to explain their identity through change, Malebranche in effect undermines the claim of ﬁnite things to be separate substances.
Thus, Malebranche’s occasionalism is one step away from Spinoza’s monism.13
Leibniz’s disagreements with Malebranche and Spinoza over the correct account of the mind-body relation are rooted in deeper issues about the metaphysics
of causation. In the case of all three philosophers, their explanations of the apparent causal relation between the human mind and the human body—responses
to the perceived failure of Descartes’ interactionism—emerge as special cases of
general theories of the causal relations that unite ﬁnite things with God and with
each other. Leibniz’s theory posits a complex array of harmonies linking the states
and actions of ﬁnite things—harmonies that are ascribed to God’s choice of this as
the best of all possible worlds.14 With this he advances his broader program of
turning back Spinoza’s theological naturalism: the limitation of God to the substance of the world, or an inﬁnite and necessary causal power. At the same time,
Leibniz upholds—against Descartes and Malebranche—his own brand of philosophical naturalism, which insists on the intelligibility and causal autonomy of
nature: whatever happens in nature can be explained in terms of the exercise of
ﬁnite causal powers.

Harmony and the ‘‘Two Natural Kingdoms’’
The fundamental principles of Leibniz’s philosophy remained unchanged through
most of his career. Until the end of his life, however, Leibniz continued to reﬁne
the system he constructed around these principles, often framing his views in
response to the probing of insightful correspondents.15
One of the fullest summaries of Leibniz’s ﬁnal philosophy is contained in the
famous Monadology, composed two years before his death. Leibniz begins by
positing a single basic entity, the monad: a simple, soul-like substance, endowed
with essential properties of perception and appetition. Every monad, according to
Leibniz, is confusedly omniscient: it represents the universe from the perspective
of a living body, and is distinguished from other monads by the distinctness of its
perceptions, or the adequacy of its knowledge (Mon 60). As ontologically independent substances, monads stand in no real relations to each other; there is no
common external space in which they are located. Nevertheless, as a condition of
their forming a single world, monads stand in ideal relations to each other. God
creates each monad such that its states are coordinated with those of every other
monad. Since each monad represents the same universe from a different perspective, the ‘‘interconnection or accommodation of all created things to each
other, and to all the others, brings it about that each simple substance has relations
that express all the others, and consequently, that each simple substance is a
perpetual, living mirror of the universe’’ (Mon 56).
This constitutes the ﬁrst and most basic level of harmony in Leibniz’s system: a
‘‘universal harmony, which results in every substance expressing exactly all the
others through the relations it has to them’’ (Mon 59). By coordinating inﬁnitely
many diverse perceptual representations of an inﬁnitely complex universe, God is

10 Introduction

able to assure that individual monads are related to each other in a world and that
together these monads make up the best of all possible worlds: ‘‘this is the way of
obtaining as much variety as possible, but with the greatest order possible, that is, it
is the way of obtaining as much perfection as possible’’ (Mon 58).
In conceiving of the world’s harmony, however, Leibniz does not stop here.
Every monad also is endowed with its own body, together with which it constitutes
an organism, or living being, such as a plant or an animal. The body of each organism is inﬁnitely complex, consisting of smaller organisms within smaller organisms to inﬁnity (Mon 64). And Leibniz insists that nature as a whole consists of
bodies organized in this fashion:
[T]here is a world of creatures, of living beings, of animals, of entelechies, of souls
in the least part of matter. Each portion of matter can be conceived as a garden full
of plants, and as a pond full of ﬁsh. But each branch of a plant, each limb of an
animal, each drop of its humors, is still another such garden or pond. (Mon 66–67)

Leibniz’s descriptions of the microstructure of matter rely heavily on metaphor, yet
they support the basic point that over and above the minimal ontology of soul-like
monads, he defends a second level of ontological commitment, which regards the
world as consisting of an inﬁnite envelopment of living beings: soul-like monads
together with their organic bodies.
Leibniz’s explanation of the operation of these living beings generalizes from
his hypothesis of preestablished harmony. Advanced in the New System as a solution to the Cartesian problem of mind-body communication, the theory now is
extended to Creation as a whole: nature everywhere consists of soul-like monads
whose activities are harmonized with those of their individual organic bodies, and
thereby with the states of all other monads. Leibniz characterizes this scheme as
involving a ‘‘perfect harmony between two natural kingdoms, the one of efﬁcient
causes, the other of ﬁnal causes’’ (Mon 87):
Souls act according to the laws of ﬁnal causes, through appetitions, ends, and
means. Bodies act according to the laws of efﬁcient causes or of motions. And
these two kingdoms, that of efﬁcient causes and that of ﬁnal causes, are in harmony with each other. (Mon 79)

Leibniz maintains that the ‘‘two natural kingdoms’’ are causally autonomous and
universal. Thus, for him, nature everywhere consists of souls (or soul-like monads)
acting in accordance with laws of ﬁnal causation and bodies acting in accordance
with laws of efﬁcient causation.
The interpretation of Leibniz’s ‘‘two natural kingdoms’’ brings with it some of
the most difﬁcult and hotly contested issues in recent Leibniz scholarship. On the
face of it, the view is consistent with two very different ontological positions. Most
straightforwardly, it might be thought, Leibniz’s ﬁnal ontology is one of ‘‘living
beings,’’ speciﬁed as ‘‘corporeal’’ or ‘‘composite substances’’ (Mon 61), to which
simple substances contribute as organizing forms. On this reading, to the extent
that corporeal substances appear to interact with other corporeal substances, they
do so as bodies in accordance with laws of efﬁcient causation. To the extent that

Introduction

11

they act purposively, for the sake of speciﬁc ends, they do so as souls in accordance
with laws of ﬁnal causation. The attractions of this reading are many, and it is
surely correct to think that it is Leibniz’s position at one level of analysis. It may
even have been his preferred theory prior to the emergence of the doctrine of
monads in the 1690s.16 What is less clear is whether it is his ultimate metaphysical
theory—his bedrock account of reality, as created by God.
Weighing against this conclusion are numerous texts in which Leibniz explicitly limits reality to monads alone. As he writes in a 1704 letter to Burcher de
Volder:
[C]onsidering the matter carefully, we must say that there is nothing in things but
simple substances, and in them, perception and appetite. Moreover, matter and
motion are not substances or things as much as they are the phenomena of
perceivers, the reality of which is situated in the harmony of the perceivers with
themselves (at different times) and with other perceivers. (G 2:270/AG 181)

On this reading of Leibniz’s position, soul-like monads alone are fully real, or entia
per se. They alone are genuine substances, each requiring nothing for its existence
except God’s creation and conservation. All other things, including composite
corporeal substances, are only ‘‘entities by aggregation [Entia per aggregationem],
and to that extent phenomena, existing, as Democritus put it, by convention and
not by nature’’ (G 2:252/AG 177). With this account in place, Leibniz’s ‘‘two natural
kingdoms’’ end up having very different statuses, with the kingdom of efﬁcient
causes subordinated, via relations of ontological dependency, to the kingdom of
ﬁnal causes. As it is in itself, reality (i.e., monads) operates according to laws of
ﬁnal causation. However, that same reality is represented by monads as a world
of bodies, interacting through collisions in space and time. Thus, the laws of efﬁcient causation—laws of the motion and collision of bodies—apply only at the
phenomenal level, anticipating the claim of Kant’s transcendental idealism. It remains an open question whether an idealism that recognizes monads alone as
substances is Leibniz’s ultimate position. The textual evidence in support of this
view is not unambiguous, even in writings from the ﬁnal decade of his life.17

The Kingdoms of Nature and Grace
Leibniz regards human minds as a subclass of monads that are distinguished by
their capacity for reﬂection and understanding. This brings with it signiﬁcant
epistemic, moral, and theological consequences. While ‘‘souls, in general, are
living mirrors or images of the universe of creatures,’’ Leibniz writes, ‘‘minds are
also images of the divinity itself, or of the author of nature, capable of knowing
the system of the universe, and imitating something of it through their schematic
representations of it, each mind being like a little divinity in its own realm’’ (Mon
83). Minds are characterized most basically by their capacity to comprehend intellectual truth: the eternal and necessary truths of reason and contingent truths
concerning the order and harmony of the created world. In virtue of this knowledge, they are able to grasp reﬂectively the ends that have guided God in creation,

12 Introduction

and they are able to structure their own actions around the pursuit of these same
ends. For this reason, minds stand in a unique relation to God:
This is what makes minds capable of entering into a kind of society with God, and
allows him to be, in relation to them, not only what an inventor is to his machine
(as God is in relation to the other creatures) but also what a prince is to his
subjects, and even what a father is to his children. (Mon 84)

Collectively, rational minds comprise what Leibniz calls ‘‘the city of God’’:
‘‘the most perfect possible state under the most perfect of monarchs’’ (Mon 85).
This ‘‘truly universal monarchy,’’ he writes, ‘‘is a moral world within the natural
world, and the highest and most divine of God’s works’’ (Mon 86).18 The designation of rational minds as ‘‘a moral world within the natural world’’ returns us to
Spinoza’s complaint about those who ‘‘conceive man in nature as a dominion
within a dominion.’’ In one sense, this is an apt description of Leibniz’s position:
rational minds stand in a fundamentally different relation to God, through whom
they are constituted as a ‘‘dominion within a dominion.’’ In Leibniz’s view,
however, the ‘‘moral world’’ to which minds belong can be fully explained in
naturalistic terms. In contrast to Kant, the capacity of minds for moral agency does
not presuppose a ‘‘transcendental’’ freedom. Instead, freedom is conceived as a
power that is exercised under the constraints of natural causation. As Leibniz
understands it, the highest form of freedom is ‘‘freedom of mind,’’ wherein an
agent acts in accordance with reason’s judgments concerning the greatest good. At
the same time, understood metaphysically, that choice is a spontaneous action,
caused by the operation of a power inherent in the agent’s soul or substance.
The ﬁnal harmony that Leibniz invokes in the Monadology relates ‘‘the
physical kingdom of nature and the moral kingdom of grace,’’ or ‘‘God considered
as the architect of the mechanism of the universe, and God considered as the
monarch of the divine city of minds’’ (Mon 87). The harmony of the kingdoms of
nature and grace addresses the primary topic of Leibniz’s theodicy: the enactment
of God’s justice with respect to the merit and welfare of human beings. A just God,
Leibniz believes, must ensure that virtue is properly rewarded with happiness, and
vice punished with unhappiness. Yet our experience of our earthly existence
suggests that this balance often is not achieved: the virtuous suffer unaccountably,
and the wicked appear to proﬁt from their wickedness. The orthodox Christian
response to this paradox is that a proper reckoning will come only in another life,
in which those justiﬁed through Christ’s grace will enjoy the bliss of eternal
happiness, while the rest will suffer eternal damnation. While professing allegiance
to the Christian doctrine of justiﬁcation, Leibniz presents a different picture of the
operation of divine justice in the Monadology—one consistent with the broader
features of his naturalism. On this account, the balance between merit and happiness is preserved by natural means within the earthly existence of human beings:
God the architect pleases in every respect God the legislator, and, as a result, sins
must carry their penalty with them by the order of nature, and even in virtue of the
mechanical structure of things. Similarly, noble actions will receive their rewards
through mechanical means with regard to bodies, even though this cannot, and
must not, always happen immediately. (Mon 89)

Introduction

13

In response to the objection that the balancing of merit and happiness often does
not seem to occur within our earthly existence, Leibniz argues that this existence
cannot be measured by what we take to be a natural lifetime. Living beings do not,
properly speaking, die. What we take to be death is merely a stage in life, an
enfolding and diminution of the body, which is followed by a later regeneration,
development, and growth (Mon 73). Divine justice, Leibniz claims, is expressed
with respect to this succession of life-stages, which are united in the experience of a
single rational agent. And, crucially, he insists that all of this is encompassed within
God’s plan for the best of all possible worlds, in which ‘‘harmony leads things to
grace through the very paths of nature’’ (Mon 88).

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
Leibniz’s voluminous writings, spanning more than half a century, contain a heady
mix of rigorous argument and imaginative speculation. The views they defend, a
cross section of which we have outlined above, have occupied commentators for
more than three centuries. The essays gathered in this book are important new
contributions to the Leibniz literature.
The book opens with two studies that tackle different aspects of one of the
primary topics of Leibniz’s metaphysics—the relation of unity and multiplicity—as
it is explored in his early writings. Mark Kulstad’s essay, ‘‘The One and the Many
and Kinds of Distinctness,’’ offers a fresh take on an issue that has been the subject
of much recent scholarship: Leibniz’s reputed brief embrace of monism and
pantheism—doctrines associated with Spinoza—during his formative Paris period
(1672–76). Commentators have been divided on whether Leibniz’s metaphysical
inquiries ever led him to a position resembling Spinoza’s. Kulstad sharpens the
debate by framing it in terms of the kinds of distinction that might be held to exist
between the unity of God and the multiplicity of created things. On his reading, in
at least one text from the period Leibniz advances the thesis that there is no ‘‘real
distinction’’ between God and created things. Given this, Kulstad argues, there is a
sense in which Leibniz can be understood to defend versions of monism and
pantheism, although not ones that immediately license the charge of Spinozism.
In ‘‘Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity,’’ Christia Mercer examines the
basis of Leibniz’s views on the unity of corporeal substance. Mercer begins from the
inﬂuential analysis of Robert Sleigh, who links the unity of Leibnizian substances
to their possession of an identity through change. For Leibniz, Sleigh argues, this
identity is guararanteed by the presence of a substantial form: an internal force or
power by virtue of which any substance satisﬁes the condition of spontaneity: ‘‘each
noninitial state of an individual has as its real cause some predecessor state of that
individual’’ (Sleigh 1990: 131). Mercer acknowledges the signiﬁcance of Sleigh’s
analysis, yet she argues that important questions about unity remain unanswered
by it, above all, the problem of how a substantial form—a self-sufﬁcient active
principle—produces a unity in its associated passive principle, or body, whose
components are in constant ﬂux. Mercer contends that the key to this problem lies
in an historically informed account of Leibniz’s early writings, which reveal his

14

Introduction

underlying assumptions about unity. According to Mercer, these assumptions are
broadly Platonist in character, and include the idea that a more perfect being (soul)
has the power to ‘‘emanate’’ certain of its essential properties (unity, self-sufﬁciency,
indestructibility) to a less perfect being (body). Mercer draws on this background in
outlining the suggestive theory of the ‘‘hypostatic union’’ of mind and body, which
Leibniz defends in an essay from 1669–70.
The next two contributions, by Samuel Levey and Daniel Garber, focus on the
vexed issue of the ontological status of body in Leibniz’s middle period (roughly
1680–1700). Commentators have long held that Leibniz’s commitment to an idealist metaphysics—one that restricts an independent existence to mind-like substances and relegates material things to mind-dependent phenomena—can be
traced at least as far back as 1686. One of the central planks in their argument is
Leibniz’s frequent denial that there is any precise shape in corporeal things, and
his related claim that the properties of extension, shape, and motion involve
something ‘‘imaginary.’’ In ‘‘Leibniz on Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World,’’
Samuel Levey takes issue with this conclusion. On Levey’s account, Leibniz’s
denial is restricted to the ‘‘precise shapes’’ of traditional geometry, and thus is
consistent with bodies possessing ‘‘fractal shapes’’ of inﬁnite complexity. Levey
shows that Leibniz’s views on the ﬁne structure of matter and motion (developed
in conjunction with his resolution of the ‘‘labyrinth of the continuum’’) support
such a position, which parallels his reductive analysis of the property of motion. In
both cases, Levey concludes, Leibniz’s analyses allow for ‘‘a nuanced realism about
shape and motion as properties that belong to bodies as they are in themselves’’—
and this is consistent with (though it does not entail) a realistic interpretation of
corporeal substance.
Daniel Garber is well known for his defense of Leibniz’s realism about corporeal substance during his middle period (Garber 1985). In ‘‘Leibniz and Idealism,’’ Garber revisits this reading, responding to criticisms raised by Sleigh (1990)
and Adams (1994), and offering a broader perspective on Leibniz’s metaphysical
outlook during the 1680s and 1690s. It is a mistake, Garber argues, to insist on a
nascent idealism in Leibniz’s middle period based on views he will come to
espouse later. Texts from the middle period offering prima facie support for an
idealist interpretation can be reconciled, according to Garber, with Leibniz’s
contemporaneous account of causal relations among animated bodies. At the same
time, Garber allows that there is little evidence of Leibniz deﬁning himself as a
realist about corporeal substance during the period. In the course of a concerted
attack on the Cartesian account of body, Leibniz relies implicitly on the supposition of corporeal substances, conceived as form-matter composites on analogy
with living bodies. But he largely ignores the troubling metaphysical issues—
central to his later thought—that such a supposition raises.
The concept of harmony is fundamental to Leibniz’s understanding of the
relations that unite a plurality of substances in a single world. Substances harmonize in their perceptions of a common universe, and changes in individual souls
harmonize with changes in their respective bodies. The essays by Catherine Wilson
and Nicholas Jolley both raise challenges to features of Leibniz’s hypothesis of
preestablished harmony. Wilson’s ‘‘Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation’’

Introduction

15

responds to a puzzle Sleigh (1990) has posed about Leibniz’s account of the worldconstituting relations among substances. A number of texts suggest that Leibniz is
inclined to regard the relations of compossibility, expression, and accommodation
(or harmony) as entailing one another: any collection of compossible substances
will be one in which each member of that collection both expresses and harmonizes
with every other. But Sleigh objects that this is hardly obvious: compossibility is a
necessary fact about the substances comprising a single world; by contrast, expression and harmony appear to add increasing degrees of perfection to a world. In
Wilson’s words, they are ‘‘value-adding relations.’’ Wilson proposes a novel way of
connecting these concepts. Universal expression is a feature of any Leibnizian
possible world and is deﬁned in terms of the correspondence among the contents of
the perceptions of soul-like substances. Accommodation, on the other hand, is
restricted to those worlds in which a set of more complex agreements obtains among
the interacting, spatiotemporal bodies ‘‘projected’’ by those substances.
In ‘‘Leibniz and Occasionalism,’’ Nicholas Jolley addresses another perennial
topic of Leibniz scholarship: Leibniz’s defense of the system of preestablished
harmony against Malebranche’s occasionalism. One line of criticism, going back
to Arnauld, has challenged whether Leibniz succeeds in distinguishing preestablished harmony as a genuine alternative to occasionalism. Other critics have
charged that Leibniz’s two main arguments against Malebranche—that occasionalism requires a God who ‘‘disturbs’’ the laws of nature, and that it presupposes
the occurrence of ‘‘perpetual miracles’’—both miss the mark. According to Jolley,
Malebranche has an easy response to the ﬁrst of these arguments. The second,
however, hinges on a much-discussed issue in recent philosophy of science:
whether laws of nature constitute a ‘‘rock bottom’’ in scientiﬁc explanation, or
whether such laws themselves require an explanation in terms of causal powers.
Malebranche and Leibniz agree that God governs nature through general laws,
and that miracles are to be understood as exceptions to these laws. Their disagreement turns on a further condition Leibniz imposes on laws of nature. Against
Malebranche, Leibniz holds that a law-like principle is not truly a law of nature
unless it is grounded in the causal powers of created substances. Since Malebranche denies the existence of ﬁnite causal powers, by Leibniz’s lights he is
committed to a denial of the existence of laws of nature; hence the charge of
perpetual miracles. Jolley goes on to show how Leibniz’s late metaphysics has the
resources to overcome some of his disagreement with Malebranche, by restricting
his grounding requirement to monads and settling for laws at the phenomenal
level of bodies. However, the evidence suggests that Leibniz was unwilling to make
this move, requiring that laws of impact be grounded in the physical forces of
matter, which in turn are grounded in the primitive forces of monads.
For Leibniz, the laws of nature include not only physical laws of efﬁcient
causation, governing the motions and collisions of bodies, but also laws of ﬁnal
causation, or appetite, which govern changes in the states of monads. In ‘‘Leibniz’s
Two Realms,’’ Jonathan Bennett surveys the range of claims Leibniz makes on
behalf of teleological concepts in the explanation of nature, and the harmony he
posits between parallel orders of ﬁnal causation and efﬁcient causation. Bennett
argues that in almost every case Leibniz’s assertions of the importance of teleology

16 Introduction

do not withstand scrutiny. The teleological nature of monadic appetitions is
‘‘dubious at best’’; and Leibniz fails to formulate the notion of a ‘‘teleological
pattern of behavior’’ that is required to frame an informative thesis about the
harmony between ‘‘teleological events in the mind and mechanistic ones in the
body.’’ In the end, Bennett concludes that the ‘‘teleological load’’ in Leibniz’s
philosophy is carried entirely by reason, to which Leibniz assigns both a cognitive
and a conative function. Reason teaches human beings what the good is and
disposes us to pursue it because it is good. Thus, there is at least one case in which
Leibniz’s claims for teleology are borne out.
Leibniz’s conception of rational action as action motivated by reason’s perception of the good is the starting point for the remaining essays, all of which
are concerned with Leibniz’s treatment of the human will and its freedom. In
‘‘Leibniz on Spontaneity,’’ Donald Rutherford explores the conception of spontaneity, or self-determination, that is presupposed by Leibniz’s analysis of freedom.
Traditionally, spontaneity has been understood to imply an absence of constraint
or compulsion: a spontaneous act is one in which an agent moves herself as
opposed to being moved by external causes. In the Theodicy, Leibniz makes it clear
that by ‘spontaneity’ he means the power of self-determination that is the source
of all the actions of every monad, whether rational or not. But if this so, then his
account of spontaneity seems too broad to tell us anything informative about
freedom; in particular, the notion of monadic spontaneity fails as a basis for distinguishing free acts from those in which an agent is physically constrained.
Rutherford argues that Leibniz’s writings also offer support for a narrower notion
of agent spontaneity, which characterizes cases in which an individual can be
understood as acting for the sake of the greatest apparent good. Rutherford shows
how the latter notion is deﬁned within the framework of monadic spontaneity, and
why Leibniz believes that both sorts of spontaneity are relevant to the understanding of freedom.
The contributions by Robert Adams and Michael Murray target Leibniz’s
doctrine of moral necessity, a species of determination that he takes to be consistent
with the contingency of free acts. In ‘‘Moral Necessity,’’ Adams argues that the
distinctive feature of this modality is that the notion of value—good or perfection—
plays an essential role in the determination and explanation of choice. As such,
Leibnizian moral necessity is opposed both to metaphysical necessity (that whose
denial implies a contradiction) and to ‘‘any value-free mechanism determining
choice.’’ Nevertheless, the concept of moral necessity is consistent with Leibniz’s
efforts to interpret contingency as a species of hypothetical necessity, or determination in accordance with universal laws. On Adams’s account, ‘‘moral laws,’’
according to which ‘‘the value or apparent value of an end, or some analogue of
apparent value, is sufﬁcient of itself to determine the action of a substance,’’ ‘‘are
strong enough to determine choice infallibly in advance.’’ The crucial point is that
there is no deeper explanation of how such ﬁnal causation operates—in particular,
no explanation in terms of mechanical causes. Adams concludes by considering
how this reading comports with the defense of contingency that Leibniz offers in
connection with his conceptual containment theory of truth. That an agent in
acting freely could have acted otherwise is supported by the thought that the agent’s

Introduction

17

complete concept contains as primary constituents not the free choices themselves
but ‘‘value-laden reasons’’ from which those choices follow by moral necessity, and
that no ﬁnite analysis would sufﬁce to derive the choices from their reasons. Adams
expresses skepticism, however, as to whether any further mitigation of Leibniz’s
determinism is possible.
The topic of moral necessity is approached from a different direction by
Michael Murray in ‘‘Spontaneity and Freedom in Leibniz.’’ Building on an interpretation defended in earlier writings, Murray argues that Leibniz’s conception of
moral necessity is indebted to accounts of the notion developed by late-sixteenthcentury Spanish Jesuits, and that, according to such accounts, moral necessity entails the denial of psychological determinism, or the view that volitions are ‘‘causally
necessitated by psychological antecedents.’’ Like Adams, Murray interprets moral
necessity teleologically: in acting freely, an agent acts for the sake of a perceived
good. In contrast to Adams, however, Murray does not see moral necessity as deﬁned simply by the rejection of a ‘‘blind’’ or ‘‘value-free’’ mechanism determining
choice. In Murray’s view, an assertion of moral necessity presupposes the denial
that an act of choice is either physically or causally determined by antecedent
conditions, although such conditions may nonetheless be sufﬁcient for choice.
In support of this reading, Murray appeals to texts in which Leibniz endeavors to
defend the independence of human freedom from divine determination. In order
for creatures to be held responsible for sin, God, through his willing, cannot be
understood to be the cause of sin. For a free action to be genuinely a creature’s
own, the creature must have ‘‘an active will, which is not psychologically determined.’’ Murray concludes that theological worries of this sort offer ‘‘powerful
evidence of anti-compatibilist sympathies in Leibniz’s thought,’’ and that these
sympathies favor the adoption of Jesuit moral necessity as a ‘‘buffer’’ between God
and creatures.
The ﬁnal two essays, by Sean Greenberg and Jack Davidson, focus on the role
of ‘‘intelligence’’ in Leibniz’s account of freedom. In ‘‘Leibniz against Molinism:
Freedom, Indifference, and the Nature of the Will,’’ Greenberg analyzes Leibniz’s
rejection of the doctrine of freedom promulgated by the sixteenth-century Jesuit
Luis de Molina and elaborated by his successor Francisco Suárez. Central to the
Molinist account is the notion of the will’s indifference: an agent is free if, with
all the requisites for action posited, she is able to act or not act. It has been argued
that Leibniz’s opposition to this conception of freedom hinges on its incompatibility with the principle of sufﬁcient reason. For the Molinist, the will is capable
of determining itself to one of a pair of alternatives, independent of antecedent
grounds that represent one as better than the other. Arguably, this would be a
choice for which there was no sufﬁcient reason. Greenberg contends that Leibniz’s
case against the Molinist goes beyond this, resting ultimately on their diverging
conceptions of mind and will. According to Greenberg, in Leibniz’s account of
freedom, as against that of the Molinist, the ‘‘will has no distinct functional role to
play.’’ Rather than being an independent ‘‘self-determining power,’’ the will is a
tendency or effort that depends entirely upon the mind’s representational states.
Thus, for Leibniz, the issue of freedom turns not on what the will can or cannot do
but on the distinctness of the mind’s perceptions. The highest ‘‘freedom of mind’’

18 Introduction

is the condition in which choice is determined by reason’s representations of the
good (and not by the passions); hence Leibniz’s claim in the Theodicy that intelligence is the ‘‘soul’’ of freedom.
Leibniz’s intellectualism is further explored by Jack Davidson in ‘‘Video Meliora Proboque, Deteriora Sequor: Leibniz on the Intellectual Source of Sin.’’ As
Davidson deﬁnes it, intellectualism is the view that all volitional error (or sin) is
preceded by cognitive error, or, conversely, that knowledge is sufﬁcient for virtue.
Davidson contends that Leibniz subscribes to an intellectualist position throughout his career. In later writings, however, Leibniz realizes that a potent form of
intellectualism to which he had been attracted—one identifying volition with
intellectual judgment—‘‘faces grave difﬁculties in explaining cases of incontinence
and in assigning culpability for sin.’’ Davidson argues that Leibniz’s considered
view is a ‘‘weak intellectualism,’’ which holds that sin always involves cognitive
error but does not depend solely on cognitive error. The additional factor incorporated in Leibniz’s account is the inﬂuence of the passions: appetitive and
aversive states that ‘‘unseat the rule of reason, without themselves being cognitive.’’
As Davidson explains it, the passions’ effectiveness in this regard depends upon the
‘‘essential temporality of practical reasoning.’’ Subsequent to the intellect’s judgment that a particular sinful act is to be avoided, the passions may ‘‘distract or
misdirect’’ the intellect’s focus from the wrongness of the act to the pleasure
anticipated in doing it. For Leibniz, the choice of the pleasurable over the virtuous
presupposes a cognitive error—a judgment that the former promises a greater good
than the latter. Davidson’s point, however, is that this can occur in a way that is
outside the intellect’s control: an agent may retain the knowledge that a certain act
is wrong and yet choose to perform the act, because of inattention and the nonrational force of the passions. Accordingly, Davidson concludes, Leibniz’s program
of moral education depends as much on the habituation of virtue as it does on the
acquisition of intellectual knowledge.
In this introduction we have attempted to convey a sense of the breadth of
Leibniz’s philosophical program and the diversity of topics and approaches that
characterizes recent scholarship on it. It is hoped that the essays gathered here
provide the inspiration for many more studies of Leibniz’s philosophy.

Notes
1. See also Cassirer 1902, which has had less inﬂuence on the literature.
2. Couturat (1901: x–xi) took Leibniz’s position to be expressed most clearly in the study known as
Primae Veritates (‘‘First Truths’’), now dated to 1689 (A 6.4:1643–1649/AG 30–34).
3. This applies only to the English-language literature. On the Continent, there appeared inter
alia the pioneering studies of Grua (1953, 1956) and Heinekamp (1969).
4. Parkinson 1970 was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant study of the topic in English. The other of Leibniz’s two
labyrinths, that of the continuum, did not fare signiﬁcantly better in the literature. See now, though,
Levey 1998 and Richard Arthur’s introduction to LOC.
5. Adams (1994) links this renaissance to contemporary developments in modal logic and metaphysics, which have relied heavily on the notion of possible worlds. Against the Russell-Couturat
interpretation, Adams argues that Leibniz’s view of problems concerning modality and identity ‘‘was

Introduction

19

largely shaped by his theology, and his use of logical doctrines in dealing with them cannot be understood apart from such metaphysical conceptions as that of substantial form’’ (4).
6. See, e.g., Garber 1985 and C. Wilson 1989.
7. For further texts and discussion, see Rutherford 1996 and Mercer 2001.
8. ‘‘Spinosa incepit ubi Cartesius desinit: In naturalismo’’ (Beeley 2002: 10).
9. In the main text of Leviathan Hobbes stops short of asserting the corporeal nature of God (see
chap. 12.7). Such an assertion does appear, however, in chap. 3 (‘‘On certain objections against Leviathan’’) of the Appendix to the 1668 Latin edition, which Leibniz may have known. It is reproduced in
Curley’s edition (Hobbes 1994: 540–542).
10. Arguably the charge fails in the case of the ancient Stoics, who uphold divine providence and,
in one sense, divine justice. For further discussion, see Rutherford 2001, 2003.
11. For Descartes’ statement of the ﬁrst view, see his letters to Mersenne of April 15, May 6, and
May 27, 1630 (CSM 3:20–26), and his Replies to the Sixth Objections (CSM 2:291–292, 293–294); for the
second, see Principles 3.47 (CSM 1:257–258).
12. See, in particular, paragraph 85 of the Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect, which
Leibniz knew from Spinoza’s 1677 Opera posthuma: ‘‘[O]bjective effects proceed in the soul according
to the formal nature of its object. This is the same as what the ancients said, i.e., that true knowledge
proceeds from cause to effect—except that so far as I know they never conceived the soul (as we do here)
as acting according to certain laws, like a spiritual automaton’’ (CWS 37). For Leibniz’s appropriation of
the term ‘spiritual automaton,’ see the passage quoted earlier from the New System and T 52.
13. See On Nature Itself, sec. 15 (G 4:515/AG 165–166).
14. For an account of how the maximization of harmony underwrites this being the best of all
possible worlds, see Rutherford 1995a.
15. See the articles collected in Lodge 2004.
16. For an inﬂuential account of Leibniz’s shifting views during the 1680s and 1690s, see Sleigh
1990, chaps. 5 and 6.
17. For arguments supporting an idealist reading, see Adams 1994 and Rutherford 1995a. For
arguments against, see Hartz 1998.
18. Leibniz’s description of the ‘‘city of God’’ as a ‘‘truly universal monarchy’’ is at odds with
Augustine’s limitation of its membership to the Christian elect. Leibniz’s city resembles more closely
the Stoic cosmopolis: ‘‘a single city and state shared by humans and gods’’ (Cicero, De ﬁnibus 3.64).

1

The One and the Many
and Kinds of Distinctness
The Possibility of Monism or
Pantheism in the Young Leibniz
MARK KULSTAD

The One and the Many
It would be no doubt an exaggeration to say that Leibniz was obsessed by the various
forms of the one-many problem. But the issue certainly pervaded his philosophical
thought. From universal harmony to perception, from corporeal substance to theology, from philosophy of science to nominalism, the problematic of the one and the
many played an important role in his reﬂections throughout the course of his
philosophical life.
If many individual aspects of this emphasis are well known, their combined
weight has perhaps been insufﬁciently appreciated. Consider, to begin, an issue
currently being examined in great depth: (1) the issue of corporeal substance in the
philosophy of Leibniz.1 Is a corporeal substance, somehow involving inﬁnitely
many substances, itself also strictly one substance, strictly an unum per se? And if so,
exactly how do the many substances become one? Arnauld was one of those who
pressed Leibniz on this (see, for example, LA 65–66, 108–109). Is the corporeal
substance perhaps—as Hans Poser has suggested recently—something strictly less
than an unum per se but also something more than simply an unum per aggregationem, some sort of derivative unity?2 If so, the exact sense of this unity or
oneness would be of considerable interest.
Commencing from the issue of corporeal substance, one might readily proceed in either of two opposite directions. (2) One might withdraw into the interior
life of a single Leibnizian substance to consider the case of perception. Perception
for Leibniz is simply the expression of the many in the one,3 thus providing as it
were a psychological perspective on our problem.4 Bayle was one of those who
pressed Leibniz for a clearer solution in the case of a simple substance, somehow
20

The One and the Many

21

one despite the multiplicity within it; Leibniz conceded to him that the issue was
‘‘one of those which are most in need of clariﬁcation’’ in his philosophy.5 (3)
Alternatively, one might turn outward to the exterior complexity of the whole
world to consider the case of Leibnizian universal harmony. This universal harmony is, for Leibniz—as of course for him all harmonies are—a unity in multiplicity, only in this case among all things (A 2.1:333). Both of these examples bring
the issue of the one and the many into the spotlight, though at very different levels
of analysis, the psychological and the cosmological—perhaps not surprising in a
philosophy where the microcosm mirrors the macrocosm.
With only a passing reference to (4) Leibniz’s nominalism, which of course
provides the German philosopher with a response to one of the most historically
familiar versions of the problem of the one and the many,6 let us turn to philosophical theology and its relation to the one and the many in Leibniz’s thought.
Here we ﬁnd, ﬁrst, the question (5) how the one God gives rise to the inﬁnitely
many of this world (Kulstad 1999). Second, we ﬁnd the complicating feature in
Leibniz’s philosophical theology that (6) the one God is really triune, that is, a God
that is one but somehow involves three persons—the God of the Trinity.7 (Note
that this is, atypically for Leibniz, an example of the problem of the one and the
ﬁnitely many.) Finally, in an issue that has recently gained prominence in connection with discussions of inﬁnity in Leibniz, we ﬁnd Leibniz subject to change
on the question (7) whether God is the soul of the universe.8 Early in his life, at
least brieﬂy, Leibniz endorsed the view that God is the soul of the universe (A
6.3:474/DSR 25). In his maturity, he fought against the view with some passion
(Carlin 1997). The topic is relevant to the current discussion in that such a relation
between God and the world would be one way to bring unity, or oneness of some
kind, to the multiplicity of God and the inﬁnitely many items of this world.
Although this is not the speciﬁc topic that will be taken up in this essay, there is
some relation between it and the main issues I will discuss here.
While one could provide further examples in this vein, issues (1)–(7) sufﬁce to
make it understandable why Heinrich Schepers has said recently that ‘‘one can
view Leibniz’s metaphysics as the work of rationally explicating the different expressions of the polarity of the one and the many’’ (2000: 171).9 It is not, to be sure,
the project of this essay to canvass this whole topic. Rather I shall aim to contribute
something in connection with an intriguing and important aspect of it, not appearing in (1)–(7) just sketched. It is an issue highlighted by recent discussions of
the question whether Leibniz ever adopted the monism (some would say pantheism) of Spinoza, that is, whether Leibniz ever seriously considered a philosophical solution of the problem of the one and the many, which made the
multiplicity of the world so many different aspects or manifestations or modes of
one single divine substance, or of a divinity uniting, and in some sense not really
distinguished from, all existing things. In continuing this discussion, my ultimate
purpose is to focus attention on issues important not only for the question of the
one and the many but also for clarifying a number of critical concepts in Leibniz’s
philosophy, early and late.10
Since ‘pantheism’ and ‘monism’ are both controversial and laden with multiple meanings, a preliminary discussion of the matter of terminology is in order.

22 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

The monism we are interested in is, roughly speaking, the doctrine that there is
only one substance. A relevant variant of this view is one in which the one substance is God. (Obviously, Spinoza’s system is a paradigm of monism in this sense.)
Pantheism in its etymological sense is the view that all things are God. The basic
idea here is quite frequently put in a pair of statements, as in ‘‘God is All and All is
God,’’ and is often linked to, or equated with, the idea that God is identical to the
world rather than distinct from it.11 It is typically held also that pantheism requires
a special unity of all things. Obviously, more could and should be said about the
identity and distinctness just mentioned—and it will be, later in this essay. But for
the present, these preliminary deﬁnitions and remarks may serve as a reasonable
basis for discussion.
Turning from the deﬁnitions of these terms to the relation between them, we
should note that, especially in connection with Spinoza, the terms ‘pantheism’ and
‘monism’ are sometimes used interchangeably. While this procedure is perhaps
justiﬁable in some contexts, the associated concepts should in general be distinguished. I will here follow Michael Levine, the author of Pantheism and useful
related articles,12 in saying that not all forms of pantheism are monistic, and not all
forms of monism are pantheistic (1992: 95–98). The former point allows for pantheistic systems that are not based on a substance-metaphysics at all, and also for
ones that are so based, but involve many substances rather than just one, substances nonetheless integrated into the pantheistic divine unity that Levine emphasizes. The latter point allows for a monism of one substance, but one in which
‘‘‘Unity’ in a relevant pantheistic sense is absent’’ (Levine 1992: 98). Such a system
would not, for Levine, count as pantheistic. It is worth noting that in the end
Levine endorses the idea of Spinoza as both a monist and a pantheist, thereby
acknowledging that unity in a relevant pantheistic sense is present in Spinoza.13
Since Spinoza holds that the one substance, God, is indivisible,14 this suggests,
what I shall in fact assume for purposes of this essay, that a monism in which the
one substance is both divine and indivisible falls under the relevant pantheistic
sense of ‘unity’ and hence counts as pantheistic. This still leaves some question as
to the exact boundaries of unity in a ‘‘relevant pantheistic sense’’ in other contexts.
But I shall not pursue this detail further here.15
With these terminological points addressed, and returning to the subject
at hand, we note that a natural ﬁrst response to one aspect of the topic proposed
earlier is likely to be simply that since Leibniz is so obviously opposed to
monism—a fortiori, to monistic pantheism—there is little point in examining any
claimed Leibnizian endorsement of these two positions. Leibniz, some might
insist, positively reveled in the multiplicity of the inﬁnitely many individual substances, the world of monads, that he made famous. He clearly opposed himself to
Spinoza on the point of monism versus monadism, indeed, so strongly that it is
implausible that he ever took a supportive view. The following passage might serve
as a basis for such a sentiment:
[I]t is through these very monads that Spinozism is destroyed, for there are just as
many true substances, as many living mirrors of the universe which subsist always,
or as many concentrated universes, as there are monads; according to Spinoza, on
the contrary, there is only one substance. He would be right if there were no

The One and the Many

23

monads; then everything except God would be of a passing nature and would
vanish into simple accidents or modiﬁcations, since there would be no substantial
foundation in things, such as consists in the existence of monads. (to Bourguet,
December 1714; G 3:576)

Now I have no intention of opposing the view that the mature Leibniz was
indeed a pluralist, that is, that he believed in his maturity that there are many
substances rather than just one. But despite the forcefulness of passages such as this
one, there is proﬁt to be made by looking into passages that some (myself included)
have taken to suggest that at certain points in his youth Leibniz was, or may have
been, a monist and/or a pantheist.16 The payoff, again, is that it helps bring into
sharper focus certain important issues for Leibniz’s philosophy, youthful and mature,
that might not otherwise be sufﬁciently understood or appreciated.

Kinds of Identity and Distinctness in Relation
to Monism and Pantheism
Let us begin by picking up the thread of identity and distinctness in connection
with some puzzling—some might even say mystifying—accounts of the doctrine of
pantheism. What could it mean, for instance, to say that God is identical to the
world, as opposed to distinct from it? Or what could it mean to say that God is all
or is everything? Leibniz himself appeared to see serious difﬁculties here, for he
expressed himself quite strongly to Eckhard as follows: ‘‘it seems impossible for
there to be a Being that is everything; for it could be said of such a Being that it is
you and it is me, which I think you will not admit’’ (28 April 1677; A 2.1:323, quoted
in Adams 1994: 130–131). Conceivably, Leibniz had a simple argument in mind: if a
Being were identical to everything, then it would be identical to you, and identical
to me; in this case, by the transitivity of identity, you and I would be identical; but
we are not identical; so the supposition is absurd.17 Clearly, conceptions of identity
and distinctness are fundamental here, as they clearly were in our initial formulations of pantheism. But if the foregoing reconstruction of Leibniz’s thought
correctly identiﬁes the speciﬁc sense of identity that those who have claimed that
God is all and all is God had in mind, then the claim is indeed puzzling.
This suggests that we need to look harder at notions of identity and distinctness
in connection with pantheism (and, as we shall see, in connection with monism as
well). Some remarks of G.H.R. Parkinson will serve to motivate further this closer
look. While in the end coming down on the side of those who see no pantheistic
tendencies in the philosophy of Leibniz in 1675–76, Parkinson points out ‘‘a remarkable passage . . . which may be thought to be clearly pantheistic. Leibniz says,
‘Just as the form of the number three differs from all its parts, so do things differ
from God. God is all things; creatures are some things.’ ’’18 Parkinson’s comment
on this is that ‘‘Leibniz seems to be saying here that God is all things, and that
creatures—i.e. what are normally called God’s creation—are parts of God. It is
unlikely, however, that this really was Leibniz’s view’’ (Parkinson 1978: 88).
I won’t take issue with the interpretation itself, here. Rather, I want to focus on
the issue of identity and distinction that is imbedded in Parkinson’s formulation

24 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

that God is all things and that things, or what are normally called creatures, are
parts of God. It seems clear enough that Parkinson here offers a part-whole formulation of a proposed (pantheistic) God-world relationship: God is a whole in
which the things of this world are parts, and in this sense God is the whole thing.
But notice that the objection Leibniz raised in philosophizing with Eckhard does
not seem to apply to this formulation. There, Leibniz to all appearances interpreted the idea of God being everything in terms of God being numerically
identical with each thing. Via the transitivity of numerical identity, he would then
be able to derive what he took to be the absurdity that one person would be
numerically identical to another. Such an absurdity does not follow from a partwhole formulation of the God-world relationship of the sort just presented. On this
formulation, it is not the case that God is numerically identical to each thing of
this world. Rather, God is numerically identical to a whole, and each of the things
of this world is a part of this whole. Since it is not the case that God is numerically
identical to these parts taken individually, the inference Leibniz presented to
Eckhard is blocked.
So far, in discussing Parkinson’s ‘‘remarkable passage’’ and Parkinson’s commentary on it, we have focused on identity. But looking at the same issue with our
focus turned instead toward distinctness is also worthwhile.19 Consider the following question: assuming the part-whole formulation of pantheism, is a thing of
this world distinct from God? Neither yes nor no is a completely satisfying answer.
Either answer seems to require further explanation. Yes, some will be tempted to
say, any thing of this world is distinct from God given the part-whole formulation
because no thing (e.g., Eckhard) simply is God. Eckhard, for instance, would
indeed be a part of God on this formulation, but he would not be numerically
identical to God. Others, however, may be tempted by a different answer. No, they
might say, on the part-whole formulation a thing of this world is not truly distinct
from God, for each such thing is a part of God, is within God. To be sure, no such
thing is numerically identical to the whole, to God. But the thing is numerically
identical to something that is a part of God. In this sense, it is not distinct from
God. It is not something that exists over and above God, something that exists in
addition to God. It is something that exists as part of God.
What is suggested here is a sense of ‘distinctness’ different from the sense of
‘numerical distinctness.’ A proper part, we might say, is indeed numerically distinct
from the whole of which it is a part, but it is not distinct from the whole in another
sense, a sense that we can here specify as follows, under the label ‘mereological
distinctness’:
x and y are mereologically distinct iff (i) x and y are numerically distinct and (ii)
neither x nor y is a part of the other.

While this modestly formal statement may seem foreign or strained, I submit that it
captures a fairly standard aspect of ordinary human communication about things,
about whether or not some thing a and some thing b are distinct from, other than,
or separate from one another. But whether or not this point meets with agreement,
I contend that in connection with issues of monism and pantheism a good argument that this sense of distinctness is valuable is that it affords a basis from which to

The One and the Many

25

give a defense of Spinoza’s argument for monism (Kulstad 1996). This encourages
the thought that the examination of this speciﬁc sense of distinctness, and, more
generally, various speciﬁc senses of identity and/or distinctness involved in various
forms of monism or pantheism, can be quite important in thinking clearly about
these issues.
Continuing in this vein, I would claim that another sort of distinction is
signiﬁcant in this connection, a sort well known to students of seventeenth-century
philosophy. This is real distinction (as opposed to a modal distinction or a distinction of reason), the form of distinction crucial in Descartes’ argument for
mind-body dualism and also taken up by Spinoza in his attempted defense (very
much in opposition to Descartes) of the idea that the attributes of thought and
extension might both be attributes of the same substance.20 It is here that we will
ﬁnd the main textual focus of this essay.
In approaching the texts, the following senses of ‘monism’ are available to us.21
The list is not meant as exhaustive.
(A) MonismND is true iff there exists an x such that x is substance and
there exists no y such that y is substance and x is numerically
distinct from y.
(B) MonismMD is true iff there exists an x such that x is substance and
there exists no substance y such that y is mereologically distinct
from x.22
(C) MonismCD is true iff there exists an x such that x is substance and
there exists no substance y such that y is constituentially distinct
from x.23
(D) MonismRD is true iff substance exists and there exist no x and y
such that x and y are substances and x is really distinct from y.24

A similar list of senses of ‘pantheism’ is available to us. Note that in all of these
deﬁnitions, it is assumed that the God that is said to exist has unity in the relevant
pantheistic sense, whatever that sense might be exactly. The deﬁnitions involve
various ways of spelling out the rough idea that God is all, or that nothing is
‘‘distinct’’ from God.
(A) PantheismND is true iff God exists and nothing is numerically distinct from God.
(B) PantheismMD is true iff God exists and nothing is mereologically
distinct from God.
(C) PantheismCD is true iff God exists and nothing is constituentially
distinct from God.
(D) PantheismRD is true iff God exists and nothing is really distinct
from God.

If not complete, the latter list captures a good bit of the logical and historical
space occupied by discussions familiar to most of us. Pantheism of form (A) seems
to be approximately what Leibniz had in mind as a target when he ridiculed a
pantheism-like doctrine in discussions with Eckhard (see earlier). Assuming the
truth of pantheism in the sense of formulation (A), that is, the truth of PantheismND, each thing—including Leibniz and Eckhard—would be numerically

26 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

identical to God. The consequence that each human (along with each rock along
the road, and each atom in the void, etc.) would count as the full (not partial)
divinity has fascinated (and/or repulsed) thoughtful people for centuries. The
consequence that Leibniz seems to have highlighted, however, was that in this case
he and Eckhard would not be numerically distinct (as they had of course been
assuming); rather they would be numerically identical. This was a consequence
Leibniz did not think Eckhard would accept.25
Formulation (B) covers the sort of thing that many have in mind in more
popular contemporary discussions of pantheism, namely, the vaguely scientiﬁcreligious idea that considers the whole universe of contemporary science (assume it
as materialistic and ﬁnite, for present purposes) to be somehow ultimately uniﬁed
and divine, with each material thing in the universe (including human life forms)
being a part of the pantheistic whole, a pantheistic God. On this view, God is
All (the universe, or Weltall, as the Germans would say), and individual material
things are part of the All. Putting this a bit more technically, on this view nothing
in the universe is mereologically distinct from the whole, which is God, even
though each individual material thing in the universe is numerically distinct from
the whole (a point that clearly separates this example from the previous one).
Putting this in less formal terms, nothing in the universe is something over and
above God, nothing is external to God.26
Formulation (C), with its emphasis on constituency rather than parts, would
allow for a pantheism in which all things go to make up God in some sense, but
not strictly in the sense of being parts of God—perhaps because (as in the case of
Spinoza’s system) God would somehow not be taken to be divisible into parts.27 Of
course, in terms of speciﬁc cases, the example just given would already count as
an example of PantheismCD, since in it God exists and nothing is mereologically
distinct from God. It follows from this that God exists and nothing is constituentially distinct from God,28 which is just PantheismCD. But if one wants at
least the suggestion of a more concrete example of the latter type of pantheism that
is not also an example of the former, consider, from a speciﬁc perspective, the
example I have already mentioned, provided by Leibniz in a passage that Parkinson calls ‘‘remarkable’’: ‘‘God is all things; creatures are some things’’ (Parkinson
1978: 88).29 Now one could (and Parkinson himself does, as shown earlier) interpret this in terms of whole and parts. But such a reading is not forced by the
passage.30 Leibniz, or someone else propounding a verbally similar view, might
have in mind a doctrine in which the relation implied between God and things
was not that of whole and parts, but rather something less strict, something
nonetheless falling under some notion of constituency.31
Formulation (D) can also be related to a philosophically familiar sort of view,
though one that is clearly quite different from the three views just considered.
Simplifying a bit, we can discuss this on the model of Descartes’ idea that only two
substances are really distinct, while a substance and its modes are not really distinct, but only modally distinct (Principles 1.60–61). Analogously, in a system in
which all the things of this world were taken as modes of the one substance, God,
one might say that the things of this world, that is, the modes, are not really distinct
from God; rather each mode is only modally distinct from God. Nothing else in

The One and the Many 27

this system, we assume, would be really distinct from the existing God either;
hence we would have a case of PantheismRD.32
I think it will be agreed that the various doctrines of monism and pantheism
that have been considered through the ages (and not infrequently viliﬁed) have
often been obscure and confusing, difﬁcult to understand and distinguish. I hardly
claim that the modest approach offered here can cut through all the haze. But I do
claim that focusing on identity and distinctness, in their various senses and
manifestations—some of which have been put on display here—can help remove
some of the mystiﬁcation and confusion surrounding the doctrines of monism and
pantheism.33 Hereafter I shall try to do just this sort of thing in a more limited way,
in connection with recent discussions of the young Leibniz as a possible monist
and/or pantheist.

Real Distinction and Leibniz’s Argument
That All Things Are One
With these preliminaries out of the way, let us turn directly to the young Leibniz,
for a look at what appears to be—I will not here say deﬁnitely is—a youthful
expression by Leibniz of monistic pantheism. The advantage of the previous discussion is that we can now put the hypothesis in a much more speciﬁc form: the
present hypothesis is that the passage in question can be read as an expression of a
monistic pantheism of the speciﬁc types, Monism RD and PantheismRD. Although
the passage has been discussed by others as well, notably Adams and Mercer,34 my
discussion is distinguished by its emphasis on the central role of the notion of real
distinction in this text, as opposed to the other kinds of distinction on display in the
second section herein. The quotation in question (which I shall refer to as the ‘‘all
things are one’’ passage), is drawn from a paper dated by the Academy editors to
November 1676(?), Quod Ens Perfectissimum Sit Possibile:
It can easily be demonstrated that all things are distinguished, not as substances . . . but as modes. This can be demonstrated from the fact that, of those
things which are radically distinct, one can be perfectly understood without another; that is, all the requisites of the one can be understood without all the
requisites of the other being understood. But in the case of things, this is not so; for
since the ultimate reason of things is unique, and contains by itself the aggregate
of all requisites of all things, it is evident that the requisites of all things are the
same. So also is their essence, given that an essence is the aggregate of all primary
requisites. Therefore the essence of all things is the same, and things differ only
modally. . . . If only those things are really different which can be separated, or, of
which one can be perfectly understood without the other, it follows that no thing
really differs from another, but that all things are one. (A 6.3:573/DSR 93, 95)35

This is, in my view, a fascinating passage, well worth the attention it has
received in recent years. The argued thesis, that all things are one, is of interest in
its own right, even if all mention of monism and pantheism were set aside. (I shall
return to this speciﬁc question later.) But in fact the suggestion of monism36 and of
pantheism37 has been a focal point for discussion to date. This examination will

28 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

not be an exception to this, even if it goes beyond previous discussions (including
my own) in a variety of ways. I cannot here deal with all the useful commentary
that this passage has received. My more limited aim is to offer a reading of this
passage that articulates the argument present in it and that makes clear how, and in
just what sense of distinctness, one could see this passage as a statement of monism
and/or pantheism. I shall be concerned as well to show the relation between
Leibniz’s use of real distinction in this passage and Descartes’ important use of the
same distinction. I argue that Leibniz’s use of the notion of real distinction (and
related concepts, primarily modal distinction) is close enough to Cartesian uses38
to make it reasonable to look to material from Descartes as an occasional aid in
interpreting Leibniz’s meaning in this passage. Let us examine things a bit more
closely.
In the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage, Leibniz uses the terms ‘really differ’ and
‘modally differ’ (realiter differunt, realiter . . . differe, and differunt . . . modo) at important places in his argument, and also suggests both real and modal distinctions
in his opening statement of the thesis to be proved: ‘‘all things are distinguished,
not as substances . . . but as modes [Res omnes non ut substantias sed modos distingui]’’ (A 6.3:573; emphasis added). He gives an account (perhaps only a partial
account) of real distinction as well, namely, that ‘‘only those things are really
different which can be separated, or, of which one can be perfectly understood
without the other’’ (A 6.3:573). To all appearances this is the same account given in
connection with things that are said to be ‘‘radically distinct’’ earlier in the passage.
This use of the two terms ‘really’ and ‘radically’ in connection with distinction is a
bit confusing, but in fact Leibniz at ﬁrst wrote not radicaliter distincta but rather
realiter distincta (really distinct) earlier in the passage. So it appears both from
Leibniz’s terms and from content he assigned them that we have one concept at
work in these two portions of the passage, but some uncertainty and inconsistency
as to labeling.39
Certainly the label realiter distincta would have been more familiar to contemporaries, and in fact, the concept referred to would have been quite familiar as
well: for key points from Descartes on real distinctness are quite similar to Leibniz’s points on real (or ‘‘radical’’) distinctness in the passage above. First, Descartes
says, ‘‘Real distinction properly exists only between two or more substances’’
(Principles 1.60). This makes sense of Leibniz talking about things not being
‘‘distinguished as substances,’’ and then turning immediately to discussion of real/
radical distinction, without ever explaining what justiﬁes the transition. For the
transition was familiar enough to those who knew Descartes not to require explanation: the distinction that applies to substances is real distinction, not modal
distinction. Second, Descartes says, ‘‘we perceive these to be really distinct from
one another from the sole fact that we can clearly and distinctly understand one
without the other’’ (Principles 1.60). Leibniz’s talk of perfectly understanding one
without the other is certainly very close to this, and consequently Leibniz’s (admittedly wavering) choice of the term ‘really distinct’ to connect up with this
would not have seemed out of place to contemporaries.40 Finally, although it will
not play a central part in my discussion of real distinction, it is worth mentioning
that Leibniz includes in this passage another idea about his real distinctness that is

The One and the Many 29

close to Descartes’ position. Late in the passage Leibniz gives two apparently
equivalent clauses (seu is the connective): the ﬁrst is the one I have just considered—
one can be understood perfectly without the other; the other is, roughly, one can
be separated (separari) from another. The latter is quite close to what Descartes
gives in Deﬁnition 10 of his ‘‘synthetic’’ exposition of a part of his system in the
Objections and Replies: ‘‘Def. X. Two substances are said to be really distinct when
each of them can exist apart from the other’’ (AT 7:162/CSM 2:114). Leibniz talks
about things that can exist in separation from one another; Descartes about things
that can exist apart from one another.41 These seem to be terminological variants
of the same basic idea.42
As for modal distinction, Leibniz does not provide us with much beyond the
label in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage. This makes things more difﬁcult than they
were in connection with real distinction, where he offered speciﬁc conditions of
real distinction. Still, given the similarities to Descartes on real distinction—and
certain textual clues that I will mention in a moment—it seems not implausible
that Leibniz had in mind something similar to Descartes’ position when talking
about modal distinction. For my purposes, the key point from Descartes is that
modal distinction exists both ‘‘between a mode . . . and the substance of which it is
a mode, and . . . between two modes of the same substance’’ (Principles 1.61). It is
the ﬁrst of these that might be unexpected. Although Leibniz uses different terminology in other passages in the same time period, he seems to have a similar
twofold distinction involving nonsubstantial items clearly in mind, in a context not
dissimilar from that of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage: ‘‘So just as these properties
differ from each other and from essence [by a modal difference?], so do things differ
from each other and from God’’ (A 6.3:519/DSR 77; emphasis added).
A ﬁnal point before I consider the argument from the ‘‘all things are one’’
passage in greater depth: what does Leibniz mean by the key term ‘requisite’
(requisitum)? In a paper written at about the same time as the ‘‘all things are one’’
passage, he says, ‘‘A requisite is that without which a thing cannot exist’’ (December 1676?; A 6.3:587/DSR 113).43 Generally, in this time period the ultimate or
primary requisites were taken by Leibniz to be the primary attributes, or the
unanalyzable perfections or forms of God.44 Adams’s statement in this regard is
helpful. He says that in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage, ‘‘the ‘ﬁrst requirements’
[primary requisites] of a thing are presumably the simplest, purest attributes occurring in the analysis of the thing. Leibniz is supposing that the conjunction of all
the simplest, purest attributes constitutes the essence of God’’ (Adams 1994: 129).
With these points better understood, let us turn to a reconstruction of Leibniz’s argument in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage, one highlighting real and modal
distinction:
1. Things are really distinct only if ‘‘one can be perfectly understood
without another.’’ (text)
2. ‘‘[O]ne can be perfectly understood without another’’ just in case
‘‘all the requisites of the one can be understood without all the
requisites of the other being understood.’’ (text)
3. ‘‘[T]he ultimate reason of things is unique’’ and it ‘‘contains by itself
the aggregate of all requisites of all things.’’ (text)

30 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
4. If ‘‘the ultimate reason of things is unique’’ and it ‘‘contains by itself
the aggregate of all requisites of all things,’’ then ‘‘the requisites of all
things are the same.’’ (text)45
5. ‘‘[T]he requisites of all things are the same.’’ (from 3, 4)
6. If the requisites of all things are the same, then to understand all the
requisites of one thing is to understand all the requisites of another.
(implicit)46
7. To understand all the requisites of one thing is to understand all the
requisites of another. (from 5, 6)47
8. No thing can be perfectly understood without another. (from 2, 7)
9. ‘‘[N]o thing really differs from another.’’ (from 1, 8)
10. ‘‘[A]ll things are one’’ if ‘‘no thing really differs from another.’’
(implicit)48
11. ‘‘[A]ll things are one.’’ (from 9, 10)
12. ‘‘[A]n essence [of a thing] is the aggregate of all . . . requisites [of the
thing].’’ (text)
13. If ‘‘the requisites of all things are the same,’’ and ‘‘an essence [of a
thing] is the aggregate of all . . . requisites [of the thing],’’ then ‘‘the
essence of all things is the same.’’ (text)
14. ‘‘[T]he essence of all things is the same.’’ (from 5, 12, 13)
15. If ‘‘the essence of all things is the same,’’ then ‘‘things differ only
modally.’’ (text)49
16. ‘‘[T]hings differ only modally.’’ (text)
17. ‘‘[N]o thing really differs from another’’ and ‘‘things differ only
modally.’’ (from 9, 16)
18. If ‘‘no thing really differs from another’’ and ‘‘things differ only modally,’’
then ‘‘all things are distinguished, not as substances . . . but as modes.’’
(implicit)
19. ‘‘[A]ll things are distinguished, not as substances . . . but as modes.’’
(from 17, 18; Q.E.D.)

A few comments on the reconstruction are in order here, not least because of
possible questions concerning lines 12–19. First, with regard to lines 12–16: why
have I changed the order of presentation, placing the points about essence, which
in the passage earlier occur well before the conclusion that all things are one, after
that conclusion? The reason for this is that, on my reading of the argument, the
points about essence (along with the linked point about modal distinction) are not
logically necessary for the conclusion that all things are one. Placing those points
after that conclusion makes this feature of my reconstruction clearer, and it serves
as well to emphasize the natural link between lines 12–16 and the ﬁnal segment of
the argument, lines 17–19.
A second question in fact deals with just that ﬁnal segment of the argument. It
is connected with a curiosity of Leibniz’s argument that might be introduced via
the following challenge: why are lines 17–19 even present in the reconstruction,
given that in the formal demonstration portion of Leibniz’s ‘‘all things are one’’
passage, no such subargument appears explicitly? Strictly, the assumption here is
correct, taking the ‘‘formal demonstration’’ to begin immediately after the initial
statement of what can be ‘‘easily demonstrated.’’ But if we consider the challenge
as a modest question, with a bit more ﬂesh on the bones, a response suggests itself.

The One and the Many

31

Isn’t it curious, one might ask, that Leibniz says that a certain thesis ‘‘can be easily
demonstrated,’’ and then, when proceeding to demonstrate it (starting with ‘‘This
can be demonstrated from the fact that . . . ’’), he never again mentions the thesis in
question, namely, that ‘‘all things are distinguished, not as substances . . . but as
modes’’? Now an important element of my reconstruction—and the basis for my
answer to the challenge just posed—is that Leibniz never lost sight of his aim to
demonstrate this thesis; he simply thought that the connection between what he
explicitly demonstrated and the initial thesis was obvious enough that it did not
need to be spelled out. In a more formal reconstruction, of course, such economy
and understatement are not permitted: one looks for the ﬁnal ‘‘Q.E.D.’’ Lines 17–19
make possible that expected culmination—and not, it is hoped, in an implausible
way. For the promised conclusion was that things are not distinguished as substances but as modes. Given what I have discussed about real and modal distinction, and given the interim conclusions of the foregoing reconstruction about
real distinction and modal distinction (that is, lines 9 and 16, ones based ﬁrmly on
what is explicitly in the demonstration), the ﬁnal steps to the initially stated thesis
should come as no surprise, even if they are not explicitly stated by Leibniz.
Although a great many further comments would be in order in connection
with this argument, concerning, for instance, possible rival reconstructions, or the
critical evaluation of this reconstruction,50 I shall limit myself here rather strictly.
I shall focus on the relation of this argument to monism and pantheism, or, more
speciﬁcally, given the foregoing distinctions and hypothesis, to Monism RD and
PantheismRD. To be sure, a ﬁrst look at this argument may well suggest to some
that, since no things are really distinct (distinct, that is, as multiple substances are),
and since moreover all things have the same essence, the divine essence,51 and are
only modally distinct (distinct, that is, as modes are), this means that for Leibniz, in
this passage, at least, all things are taken as modes of the one substance God, which
amounts to the position of Spinozistic monism, which, it is often held, is a form of
monistic pantheism. But I am trying to be more careful here than going with a
‘‘ﬁrst look’’ answer. For one thing, are we really sure we know what sense of ‘mode’
is being used here?52 More generally, now that we have seen some of the quite
diverse forms monism and pantheism can take, can such an answer be taken
seriously if it does not specify more exactly just what type of monism Spinozistic
monism is? And even if that were done, would we have enough evidence from the
few brief points mentioned in the last sentence to be conﬁdent that Leibniz’s text
commits him to that same type of monism, whatever that should turn out to be?
I suggest that we not try to encompass anything as grand as Spinoza’s system, and
instead restrict ourselves to work with the deﬁnitions or types of monism and
pantheism already laid out, and proceed in terms of them, even if the text does not
always provide a completely deﬁnitive answer in terms of correspondence.
Let us begin with PantheismRD, the doctrine that God exists and nothing is
really distinct from God. Does Leibniz espouse this position in the ‘‘all things are
one’’ passage? To be sure, the answer is not altogether obvious, in part because this
passage does not include an argument for the existence of God, or even an explicit
statement that God exists. But the context of the passage is a paper that argues that
the most perfect being is possible and that proceeds from this to a proof that ‘‘a

32 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

being of this kind . . . is necessary’’ (A 6.3:572/DSR 93). Accordingly, it seems that
we can take the ﬁrst clause as satisﬁed and turn to what in any case is the distinctive
and controversial clause of the deﬁnition, the second clause having to do with the
exact relationship of God and what other traditions call ‘‘creatures.’’ Does Leibniz
in this passage endorse the view that nothing is really distinct from God? There is
an easy, but perhaps not fully satisfying, answer to this question. It is that, yes,
Leibniz does endorse this. In fact, he claims to demonstrate that no thing is really
distinct from any other, and it follows immediately from this that, in particular, no
thing (or nothing) is really distinct from God.53 And so, given our assumption, it
follows that Leibniz endorses PantheismRD in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage.
What about the question whether the passage commits Leibniz to Monism RD,
which is the doctrine that substance exists and there exist no x and y such that x
and y are substances and x is really distinct from y? Here two things are not quite as
obvious as they might at ﬁrst seem. The ‘‘all things are one’’ passage is altogether
silent, explicitly at least, on the matter of substance. But assuming for the moment
that God’s existence is the existence of a substance, then the ﬁrst clause would be
satisﬁed, and we would again reduce things to the second clause of the deﬁnition
in question, which this time is that ‘‘there exists no y such that y is a substance and
y is really distinct from x.’’ Here line 9 of the foregoing reconstruction, Leibniz’s
intermediate conclusion that ‘‘no thing really differs from another,’’ looms large.
Given this point, it follows immediately that there are no substances S1 and S2
such that S1 is really distinct from S2. And so, given the assumption, it follows that
Leibniz endorsed MonismRD in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage.
But it might be objected that, even if it is clear that the mature Leibniz took
God as a substance, given that the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage seems in general to
be quite at odds with the positions of the mature Leibniz, why must we assume that
here? To mention just one point, it is typically granted that an individual substance
is a paradigm case of a thing, but in the group of writings (the so-called De Summa
Rerum) of which the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage is a part, Leibniz says: ‘‘I use the
word ‘thing’ readily, for we are accustomed to say, ‘God is a being,’ but we are not
accustomed to say, ‘God is a thing’ ’’ (A 6.3:519/DSR 77). If Leibniz were not taking
God as a thing in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage,54 then presumably he would not
be taking God as an individual substance in that passage either, and so presumably
the ﬁrst clause of the deﬁnition of MonismRD would not be satisﬁed.
To cover even this possibility, I note that Leibniz used the term ‘substance’ in
two senses, for both an individual substance (as in the foregoing discussion) and for
an essence.55 It is clear that in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage Leibniz is talking
about the divine essence, the essence of ‘‘the ultimate reason of things’’ (A 6.3:573/
DSR 93; see also Adams 1994: 129). And it is clear moreover that in that passage
Leibniz contends that ‘‘the essence of all things is the same’’ (A 6.3:573/DSR 95).
In this light, let us consider again the deﬁnition of Monism RD in connection with
the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage. The deﬁnition is that substance exists and there
are no substances S1 and S2 such that S1 is really distinct from S2. Let us read this
now in terms of essences rather than individual substances. With respect to the ﬁrst
clause, I contend, as in the case of my discussion of Pantheism RD, that God, as the
most perfect possible being, is said by Leibniz in the writing in question to be

The One and the Many

33

necessary, and hence to exist, and accordingly, the divine essence (substance, in
this reading) exists. With respect to the second clause, if we again read in not
individual substances but essences, we ﬁnd that since the essences of all things are
the same, one thing cannot be perfectly understood without another, and so no two
essences (substances) are really distinct. To be sure, what would result would be a
rather different Monism RD from the one in terms of individual substances. We
would be left with the oneness of the divine essence rather than the oneness of the
divine individual substance. But it would be a monism deﬁned in terms of real
distinction nonetheless.56

Comparative Testing: Adams and Mercer
One way to test the usefulness of a new approach in the history of philosophy is to
compare it with important prior treatments of the same issue. That is what I shall
undertake in this ﬁnal section. The two scholars who have most clearly devoted
attention to the kinds of issues highlighted in this essay are Robert M. Adams and
Christia Mercer. While I cannot on this occasion give their remarkable research
the full and thorough attention it deserves, I can focus on a few key issues relevant
to my reading of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage and the delineation of different
kinds of monism and pantheism, especially Monism RD and PantheismRD, with
their emphasis on real distinction.
Robert Adams’s views on monism, pantheism, and the ‘‘all things are one’’
passage are set out in section 3 of chapter 4 of his Leibniz: Determinist, Theist,
Idealist. A challenging question is posed in the title of section 3: ‘‘Is Leibniz’s
Conception of God Spinozistic?’’ (Adams 1994: 123). To be sure, the question is
ultimately answered in the negative with respect to Leibniz’s mature philosophy, in
the sense that, according to Adams, Leibniz’s root conception of God does not
have ‘‘inescapably, Spinozistic implications’’ (Adams 1994: 134). However, what is
most interesting and novel in Adams’s discussion is that the title’s question is
answered in the afﬁrmative with respect to one early period of Leibniz’s development. Speciﬁcally, Adams believes that at the time of the writing of the ‘‘all
things are one’’ passage, Leibniz developed his conception of God in a way that did
have Spinozistic implications. According to Adams, in that passage, ‘‘Leibniz ﬂatly
afﬁrms the Spinozistic idea that ﬁnite things are only modes’’ (Adams 1994: 129).
Moreover, although no speciﬁc deﬁnition is given, Adams refers to the conclusion
of the argument of the passage as a ‘‘monistic conclusion’’ (Adams 1994: 129).
For the moment I will pass over the intriguing mention of monism and the
question of what speciﬁc sense of monism might be involved here. Instead I will
focus on the question whether the Spinozistic conception of God Adams talks
about is pantheistic. The answer is not perfectly clear, although Adams often uses
the term ‘pantheism’ in the section and has certainly left the impression among
some commentators57 that he ascribes a brief pantheistic phase to Leibniz, followed by a rejection of pantheism. Using Adams’s words as a suggestive guide, I
will set out in brief the position I think Adams adopts on this question. At the time
of Leibniz’s ‘‘all things are one’’ passage, ﬁnite things are taken by Leibniz as

34 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

modes of the attributes of God. Accordingly, at ‘‘this time, ontological externality of
the resulting entities [ﬁnite things] seems explicitly rejected’’ (Adams 1994: 130). To
all appearances,58 this means that the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage is read by Adams
as being pantheistic. But, according to Adams, by 1678 the treatment of ﬁnite
things as modes of God is deﬁnitely rejected by Leibniz (Adams 1994: 130). A key to
the rejection of this view is the developing Leibnizian position that ‘‘[t]he relation
of the limited attributes of creatures to the absolute attributes of God is not the
relation of mode to attribute, since they exclude each other from any one subject,
by virtue of the negation involved in the creaturely attributes’’ (Adams 1994: 134).
In line with this, Leibniz then believed that ‘‘creatures are not ‘in’ God because
their limited attributes cannot be ‘in’ God’’ (Adams 1994: 133–134).59 Accordingly,
although Adams does not say this in exactly these words, it seems clear that on his
view Leibniz has, at the later stage, come to endorse the ‘ontological externality’ of
ﬁnite things produced by God.60 Accordingly, at this later stage a pantheistic conception of God is not adopted by Leibniz.61
There is much that I agree with here, and, to repeat, I do not propose a fullscale treatment of Adams’s position, only a few remarks related to the main results of
this essay. Consider how Adams initiates the section (‘‘Leibniz’s Later Years,’’ Adams 1994: 130) in which he examines the move away from the apparently Spinozistic
position of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage. Among other things, he quotes a passage
from 1677 that I discussed earlier, the one in which Leibniz critiques the idea of ‘‘a
Being that is everything.’’62 Adams presents this as a rejection of the pantheisticsounding Leibnizian quotation of 1676, ‘‘God . . . is everything. Creatures are some
things’’ (A 6.3:512, as quoted in Adams 1994: 130),63 and seems to present it also as a
more general turning away from the denial of ontological externality that Adams
sees in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage. But assuming the correctness of my earlier
analysis of Leibniz’s critique of a Being that is everything, that critique presupposes
a deﬁnition of pantheism along the lines of (A) earlier: PantheismND is true iff God
exists and nothing is numerically distinct from God. Meanwhile, the Leibnizian
quotation of 1676 has been interpreted by Parkinson, as we have seen, along the
lines of PantheismMD. Now to offer a critique of PantheismND is not necessarily to
offer a critique of PantheismMD. Nor would offering a critique of PantheismND
necessarily be to offer a critique of PantheismRD, which on my interpretation earlier
is precisely what Leibniz afﬁrms in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage. Please note that
I am not saying here that Adams is doing either of these things. But I am saying that
the distinctions I have drawn in the second section herein should be kept clearly in
mind in attempting to chart Leibniz’s possibly shifting stances on pantheism (and,
for that matter, monism). In fact, the point against ‘‘Being as everything’’ is not a
main element in Adams’s account of the move away from the Spinozistic position of
the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage. Other issues, such as those concerning subjects,
powers, limited and absolute attributes, and being ‘‘in God,’’ play a more central
role. But the points just discussed are nonetheless useful as a base from which to
evaluate these other issues.
As we have seen, Adams puts considerable emphasis on the idea that, in the
more mature Leibniz, ‘‘[t]he relation of the limited attributes of creatures to the
absolute attributes of God is not the relation of mode to attribute, since they

The One and the Many

35

exclude each other from any one subject, by virtue of the negation involved in the
creaturely attributes’’ (Adams 1994: 134). Here, then, we have subjects, limited and
unlimited attributes, nicely integrated. But is not the presupposition here that the
younger Leibniz, the Leibniz of the 1676 ‘‘all things are one’’ passage, did not see
some of these points, while the somewhat older Leibniz (correctly) did? And given
the nature of the points, might not that be contrary to the principle of charity, and
so (some might say) should not be adopted until other initially plausible alternatives have shown themselves to be implausible?
I suggest an alternative, which I believe is plausible. Suppose that Leibniz
never doubted (not even when he wrote the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage) that the
possession of an absolute or unlimited attribute by some x, and the possession of a
limited form of the same attribute by some y, means that x and y are distinct in
some sense, in particular, are numerically distinct. In terms of Leibniz’s law,
plausibly applied to the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage, God and a ﬁnite thing could
not be numerically identical, since God has all attributes in unlimited or absolute
form and a ﬁnite thing does not. But, the alternative reading continues, the main
point of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage concerns real distinction, not numerical
distinction.
For purposes of argument, let me put the alternative interpretation another
way: the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage does not have to do with numerical distinction. If an argument is desired, here is a rough-and-ready one. Consider a
Cartesian ﬁnite mental substance at a moment, a substance with one attribute and
some modes of this attribute. Consider one of these modes. Is it numerically
identical to the mental substance? No, it is numerically distinct. For the substance
‘‘can exist without other things, while needing only the ordinary concurrence of
God’’ (Principles 1.51), while the mode cannot so exist. So the test of Leibniz’s law
is not met. But what about real distinctness? Is the mode really distinct from the
mental substance? The answer is clear. This sort of situation is a paradigm case of
Descartes’ modal distinction, as opposed to real distinction. The mode and the
substance are not really distinct, even though they are numerically distinct. Returning to the case of God and a ﬁnite thing, the question relevant to the ‘‘all
things are one’’ passage is not whether God and the ﬁnite thing are distinct in some
sense. They are. They are numerically distinct. The question is whether they
are really distinct or only modally distinct.64 And the answer to this turns on the
speciﬁc criterion of real distinctness, not on issues of numerical distinctness (and
not necessarily, I would contend, on issues of subjects, powers, and being in God
either—a connection here would need to be argued more thoroughly).
Christia Mercer deserves much credit for her pathbreaking work on issues
connected with the young Leibniz, including those connected with the topics of this
essay.65 For example, in a recent article, ‘‘God as Both the Unity and Multiplicity in
the World’’ (Mercer 2000: 71–95), she discusses texts thought by some to suggest
pantheism in the young Leibniz, and she connects this with the problem of the one
and the many—or, more exactly, with the issue of unity and multiplicity. Her
ultimate view, however, is quite different from those who have claimed to see
pantheistic leanings in the young Leibniz. As she puts it in a related article, ‘‘Leibniz
was never a pantheist of any sort’’ (Mercer 1999: 273). Still, and interestingly, she not

36 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

only strongly afﬁrms that Leibniz did argue for a cosmological solution of the
problem of the one and the many, at least under the heading of unity and multiplicity, but she also clearly endorses the view that it is God who is ‘‘both the Unity
and Multiplicity in the World,’’66 going so far as to conclude her article with the
statement: ‘‘That God is the unity and multiplicity in the world is a fact about
Leibniz’s metaphysics that has gone unnoticed for too long’’ (Mercer 2000: 95). She
takes pains, backed by serious philosophical and scholarly work, to (1) explain the
sense in which she thinks Leibniz means this, (2) provide texts and historical analysis
to support her reading, and (3) distinguish her reading from pantheistic readings.
Both Adams’s text discussed earlier and my own work ﬁgure among the targets of
Mercer’s critique in connection with pantheism and associated issues (Adams 1994:
123–130; Kulstad 1994: 424–428).
Again, as was the case with Adams, I will only be able to take on a small
portion of Mercer’s work. Again my focus will be on important points in her work
that stand out when viewed from the perspective of the results of this essay. And the
most important of these is the issue of distinction.
Mercer is concerned to emphasize, and to document textually, Leibniz’s
commitment in his early writings to the distinction that obtains between God and
ﬁnite things. This has obvious relevance to my work earlier on the concepts of
identity and distinction in the second section herein. At one point, for example,
Mercer says, ‘‘there are a number of passages throughout the Paris period that
imply a distinction between God and creatures’’ (Mercer 1999: 277). It is fairly
clear from the context of this and similar statements that she introduces such
Leibnizian passages to oppose pantheistic readings of the young Leibniz.67 But this
point is particularly clear in the case of another passage, in which nonidentity and
nonpantheism are immediately juxtaposed. She says, ‘‘each creature is an inferior
image or expression of that essence [the essence of the supreme being, God] and is
not identical to it. Leibniz was not a pantheist during the period of 1676–77 and
what sounds like pantheism is seventeenth-century Platonism’’ (Mercer 2000: 93).
Put simply, it appears that for Mercer, if creatures and God are distinct, then there
cannot be that denial of ontological externality that she takes as the deﬁning
characteristic of pantheism.68
My own view on this, to anticipate a bit, is that distinctness comes in a number
of different varieties, and that these need to be distinguished in relation to various
sorts of pantheism before one comes to the conclusion that Leibniz was never a
pantheist ‘‘of any sort.’’ To be sure, I think there is room for accommodation
between Mercer’s reading and my own on the matter of distinctness—but not, I
think, as much as Mercer might desire. For example, when Mercer is speaking
about created things having their own power of acting, she says ‘‘they are in some
obvious sense distinct from God’’ (Mercer 1999: 278). I agree, and in this there is
room for accommodation. There is indeed ‘‘some obvious sense’’ in which Mercer
and I can agree that even the ‘‘things’’ of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage are
distinct from God: they are at least modally distinct from God. And, given the
discussion earlier, we can agree further that they are numerically distinct as well.
Thus, we can agree that PantheismND can be ruled out as a Leibnizian position at
this time. Where agreement breaks down is in relation to the question whether the

The One and the Many 37

things of this world are held by Leibniz to be distinct in some sense that makes it
possible to say that ‘‘Leibniz was never a pantheist of any sort’’ (Mercer 1999: 273).
On my view, the answer to this question is no, at least at the time of the ‘‘all things
are one’’ passage, for in that passage, Leibniz argues that ‘‘no thing really differs
from another’’ (A 6.3:573/DSR 95). Why does this not count as a denial of a speciﬁc
sort of distinctness, and an afﬁrmation of a speciﬁc sort of pantheism, namely,
PantheismRD? (I have, of course, already presented my argument that it does.) In
short, I think that one of the lines of argument in Mercer’s arsenal, that Leibniz
would insist on a distinction between God and creatures throughout his youthful
writings, would be enhanced by greater attention to the kinds of distinctness involved. Without such attention—and without a corresponding look at the kinds of
distinctness claimed or denied in various sorts of pantheism—it would seem to be
difﬁcult to get a ﬁrm grip on which philosophers at which moments are not
pantheists ‘‘of any sort.’’
Let’s look at one more passage in connection with distinctness, again linked
with ontological externality. It provides another chance to argue how the perspective of my analysis of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage in terms of real and
modal distinction may change the way one sees passages near the center of the
discussion of monism, pantheism, and the young Leibniz. Here is Mercer’s
statement:
As Robert Adams puts it in his recent book, Leibniz denied ‘the ontological
externality’ of creatures.[69] But Leibniz is no more a pantheist than is Plotinus.
That is, this is not pantheism, it is Platonism. He [Leibniz] writes, ‘‘It seems to me
that the origin of things from God is of the same kind as the origin of properties
from an essence. . . . So just as these properties differ from each other and from
essence, so do things differ from each other and from God.’’ (Mercer 2000: 93,
quoting from A 6.3:518–519/DSR 77; her emphasis)

A closer inspection of Mercer’s reading of Leibniz’s words sheds light on how two
interpretational strains can diverge so markedly. Mercer’s target is Adams’s claim
that Leibniz, in 1676, argued for pantheism in the sense of a denial of the ‘‘ontological externality’’ of creatures. Mercer clearly believes that the Leibnizian text
she gives tells against a pantheistic interpretation, presumably on the grounds that
(1) it asserts that ‘‘things differ . . . from God,’’ and (2) Adams’s interpretation of the
denial of ontological externality rules out such difference between God and
creatures. But viewed from the perspective of real and modal difference, Mercer’s
choice of texts is problematic. For if the criterion of ontological externality is real
difference (as it is in PantheismRD), so that creatures fail to be ontologically external to God if they are not really distinct from God, then the considerations
adduced earlier suggest strongly that in this passage things are not said to be
ontologically external to God. For those considerations pointed, as we saw, to the
conclusion that the difference of the passage earlier is modal difference rather than
real difference.70 An assertion of the modal difference of God and creatures would
not prove that God and creatures are really different. And of course, a key point in
the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage is precisely that ‘‘things differ only modally . . . [and]
no thing really differs from another’’ (A 6.3:573/DSR 95).

38 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

What, to conclude, are the results of our comparative testing? Having looked
at important prior treatments of Leibniz on pantheism and monism, namely, those
of Adams and Mercer, I hope one can see how the careful delineation of kinds of
distinction—and most notably attention to the special cases of modal and real
distinction highlighted in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage—is essential in gaining
full clarity on the subtle and difﬁcult issues associated with unraveling Leibniz’s
developing thought in this area. This essay has attempted to provide such distinctions and to provide an interpretation of Leibniz’s texts in light of them. The
key interpretive claim is that in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage of 1676, Leibniz
endorsed and argued for the positions of Monism RD and PantheismRD.

Notes
I thank Brenda Connor, a Ph.D. student in philosophy at Rice University, for her intelligence and
hard work in carrying out the research assistance associated with this project.
1. Here I can mention only a few who have contributed to this discussion: Garber 1985; Sleigh
1990, especially chaps. 5 and 6; Adams 1994, especially pt. 3, ‘‘Idealism: Monads and Bodies’’;
Rutherford 1995a, especially pt. 3, ‘‘Nature’’; Rozemond 1997; Hartz 1998; Phemister 1999; Woolhouse
2000; and Garber, chap. 4 herein.
2. Poser 2000: 274, discussing the correspondence with Des Bosses, especially G 2:457–458. The
discussion of corporeal substance is Leibniz’s more complicated way of dealing with (among other
things) the mind-body problem, understood in something like a Cartesian way. This problem can itself
be viewed as a version of the one-many problem. Descartes’ mind-body problem involves, as he writes to
Elizabeth, explaining how the two substances, mind and body (which may be taken as the many in this
case), can constitute one human being. As he famously says to her: ‘‘It does not seem to me that the
human mind is capable of conceiving very distinctly, and at the same time, both the distinction between
mind and body, and their union. To do that, it is necessary to conceive them as a single thing and at the
same time consider them as two things, which is self-contradictory’’ (to Elizabeth, June 28, 1643; AT
3:690/Wilson 1969: 379).
3. G 2:311. For similar statements of the deﬁnition of perception see G 2:112 and 121; G 3:581;
G 6:608; G 7:566. For discussion, see Kulstad 1977, 1982.
4. As Leibniz says in section 13 of the Monadology, ‘‘[t]his diversity [in the changing perceptions
of a monad] must involve a multitude in the unity or in the simple’’ (G 6:608/AG 214). At the same stage
of his life, as I will show in a moment, this unity signaled the presence of what is one.
5. For their exchange on this, see Clariﬁcation of the Difﬁculties Which Mr. Bayle Has Found in
the New System of the Union of Soul and Body (G 4:521–523/L 495–496).
6. For more on this, see Mates 1986, especially chap. 10.
7. Especially worthy of note in this connection is the recent book by Maria Rosa Antognazza
(1999).
8. Among those discussing Leibniz’s early views on this topic are Carlin 1997: 1–24, and Mercer
1999: 278. Carlin also takes up Leibniz’s later opposition to the view of God as the world soul. Some of
Leibniz’s arguments on this point, as discussed by Carlin, sparked a recent, serious discussion of the
inﬁnite in Leibniz. See Brown 1998; Arthur 1999a; Brown 2000; Arthur 2001. For more on the details of
the mature Leibniz’s opposition to God as soul of the world, consult also Vailati 1997: 42–46, 153–156.
9. Schepers, who gives a longer, and somewhat different, list of examples in his important study of this
topic, is one of the sources of inspiration for this study, along with R. C. Sleigh, Jr., who discussed closely
related matters with me during my semester at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, in the fall of 1996.
I owe him a debt of gratitude for making that research association possible, as well as for much more.
10. Perhaps the clearest examples of important related issues are the range of Leibniz’s uses of the
concepts of identity and distinctness, his understanding of the doctrine of universal harmony, his theory
of substance, and his views on the exact relation of God and the ﬁnite things of this world.

The One and the Many 39
11. See, for example, Owen 1971: 74; Angeles 1981: 111; Gentz 1986: 774.
12. The book is Levine 1994. For the articles, see Levine 1990, 1992.
13. Levine 1992: 98. Interestingly, as Jan Cover has reminded me in discussion, some view Spinoza
as only a panentheist (one holding the view that whatever is, is in God), and not a pantheist. This
emphasizes the point that there are different deﬁnitions of ‘pantheism,’ and associated distinctions,
waiting in the wings.
14. See Ethics IP13, P14.
15. For more on the matter of the pantheistic sense of unity, see Levine 1990: 211–236. I do not
claim that Levine would endorse my assumption for this essay about the pantheistic sense of unity.
16. See both Adams 1994: 123–134 and Kulstad 1994: 424–428. Christia Mercer has been a staunch
opponent of a pantheistic reading of the young Leibniz, and she has done extensive research on many
related issues. Among her works that should be carefully considered in this regard are Mercer 1999,
2000, 2001. The relations of Leibniz and Spinoza, particularly in connection with monism and/or
pantheism, are hardly of recent interest only. Among the other studies that should be consulted in this
area are: Stein 1890, especially chap. 5; Friedmann 1962; Parkinson 1978: 73–89. For further studies, the
reader is referred to the succinct survey of almost three hundred years of reﬂection on the question
whether Leibniz was a Spinozist provided by Morﬁno 1996 (who notes that as early as 1714 Bourguet had
accused Leibniz of Spinozism [65]).
17. On another reading of the argument, the absurdity would lie simply in the idea that any
human could be numerically identical to God.
18. Parkinson 1978: 88, quoting a passage from the paper of April 15, 1676, now available at A
6.3:512 and in Parkinson’s own newer English translation at DSR 67.
19. From this point onward, kinds of distinctness will take center stage in my discussion. But for
each kind of distinctness I discuss, there will be a corresponding kind of identity. I will not typically
emphasize or develop these, but it is worthwhile keeping the correlation in mind.
20. For Descartes, see the Sixth Meditation and Principles 1.51–56, 60–61. For Spinoza, see Ethics
IP10S.
21. It is not built into any one of these that there exists a substance that is God. Thus, what is
deﬁned here is monism in a sense that is not necessarily theological. But if theological versions were
desired, they could easily be supplied via small revisions of the deﬁnitions.
22. The deﬁnition of ‘mereological distinctness’ is given earlier, but for ease of application, here is
a restatement of (B) with that deﬁnition applied to the present case: (B) Monism MD is true iff there exists
an x such that x is substance and there exists no substance y such that y is numerically distinct from x and
y is not a part of x. Note that this deﬁnition allows that there may exist a substance (or substances)
numerically distinct from the one substance in terms of which monism is true. But such numerically
distinct substances would be parts of the whole substance in virtue of which monism is true. That is,
they would be numerically but not mereologically distinct from that substance.
23. The term ‘constituentially distinct’ has not yet been deﬁned, but the basic idea is simple
enough once one takes mereological distinctness as the model. Here is a reformulation of (C), with a
clariﬁcation of ‘constituentially distinct’ built in: (C) MonismCD is true iff there exists an x such that x is
substance and there exists no substance y such that y is numerically distinct from x and y is not
a constituent of x. Although I will not deﬁne ‘constituent’ here, I can at least clarify it, thus: any part
of a thing counts as a constituent of that thing, but one thing can be a constituent of another without
being a part of that other. For an example of this notion at work in the context of a full discussion of one
type of historical monism (Spinoza’s), see Kulstad 1996.
24. A formulation more exactly parallel to the others could have been chosen. Complexities in the
‘‘all things are one’’ passage that I will explain hereafter account for deviation. Recall that we are not
trying to give all possible senses of ‘monism.’ To anticipate a bit, albeit cryptically, the present formulation handles both individual and nonindividual substances, and simpliﬁes the treatment of other
aspects of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage at points where interpretive questions would otherwise
signiﬁcantly lengthen this essay.
25. One can link this to MonismND , although with no greater plausibility for the resulting doctrine
than Leibniz allowed to the variant of PantheismND . If we assume that God in the system just sketched
out is a substance, then the claim that nothing is numerically distinct from God implies that no

40 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
substance is numerically distinct from God. Thus, on this assumption, the present example of PantheismND would also be an example of MonismND . (If, on the other hand, God is assumed not to be a
substance—for example, if the metaphysics of the case were taken to be somehow nonsubstantial
generally—then this case would remain an example of PantheismND while not being an example of
MonismND .)
26. As far as Monism MD is concerned, the present case provides a useful starting point. If we
assume that the whole of the universe in this case counts as a single substance, then there would exist a
substance and no substance would be mereologically distinct from it. That is, on this assumption,
Monism MD would be true in this case. (If, on the other hand, the whole universe is assumed not to be a
substance, then this case would remain an example of PantheismND but would not be an example of
MonismND .)
27. Ethics IP13 in conjunction with ID6.
28. This is so because if something were constituentially distinct from God, then it could not be
numerically identical to God or to a part of God (not a part, since a part is one kind of constituent). But
since we are assuming an example in which PantheismMD is true, everything is either numerically
identical to God or to a part of God.
29. Following his translation of what is now available in A 6.3:512, and also (in a slightly different
English translation) in DSR 66–67.
30. To mention only one, confessedly strained, reading, one could let God be the set of all things
and creatures be the members of this set. Since members of sets are not parts of the sets they are in,
creatures would not, on this reading, be parts of God, although on some readings of ‘constituent’ they
would still be constituents of God.
31. Such a system, which would count as a case of PantheismCD , would also count as a case of
MonismCD , if certain assumptions about the case were made. We already have a case with God and
constituents of God and nothing constituentially distinct from God. Assume that God counts as a
substance here. Since there is nothing constituentially distinct from God, there is no substance constituentially distinct from God. But then MonismCD holds. Basically, this is the sort of monism that, on
my view, is held by the historical Spinoza—although I limit myself to the claim that for Spinoza there is
no substance constituentially distinct from God, that is, I do not ascribe to Spinoza the view that nothing
is constituentially distinct from God, as was the case in the example just sketched out. See Kulstad 1996.
(Of course, to return to my now familiar proviso, if we assume that God does not count as a substance
here, then this case would remain an example of PantheismCD but it would not count as an example of
MonismCD .)
32. This also counts as an example of MonismRD . It might be thought that the reasoning for this is
straightforward, but it is not. A simplistic line of reasoning would go as follows: we have here the
assertion that God is a substance, that God exists, and that nothing is really distinct from God; it follows
that no substance is really distinct from God; so the case is an example of MonismRD . This is not strictly
correct (although the reason why is a function of the somewhat unusual features of (D) in comparison
with the other accounts of monism). What is required in the case of MonismRD is not simply that there
be no substance that is not really distinct from the substance God, but also that there be no substances
that are really distinct from each other. In the simplistic line of reasoning, this clause is not explicitly
covered (although it might be argued that the resources are there to cover it, if the simplistic line of
reasoning were made more sophisticated, with no new premises added). Fortunately, the further stipulation on the foregoing case, not included in the simplistic line—namely, that all the things of this
world are modes—is sufﬁcient to yield the result there are no substances other than God in the system
described, a fortiori, no substances that are really distinct from one another. However, if, in the foregoing
description of the system, it were assumed that we were dealing with a nonsubstantial metaphysical
system, in which neither God nor anything else would be a substance, but it were nonetheless the case
that God exists and that nothing is really distinct from God, then in this—admittedly abstractly
described—case, PantheismRD would be true, but not Monism RD .
33. For another effort to clarify issues in a related vein, see Cover and O’Leary-Hawthorne 1999,
chap. 7, ‘‘The threat of one substance.’’ They make clear that their main focus is a slightly different onesubstance threat from what might have been expected starting from the standpoint of this essay. What
they emphasize is the question whether there is pressure in the system of the mature Leibniz away from

The One and the Many 41
his ofﬁcial position of ‘‘many created substances’’ and toward a position of ‘‘just one.’’ Still, the authors
make clear that our problem, concerning monism with respect to all substance, not just created
substance, is related: ‘‘the reader,’’ they say, ‘‘will see analogous pressures toward collapsing the distinction between God and the created world’’ (all three quotations from Cover and O’Leary-Hawthorne
1999: 255; the authors refer the reader also to n. 27 of chap. 7).
34. Adams 1994: 129–1230; Mercer 1999: 276. My ﬁrst discussion of it in print was Kulstad 1994:
425–428.
35. Where I place the ﬁrst set of ellipses, Parkinson’s translation adds an important phrase that in
the Academy edition is in the footnotes, not in the main text. This is discussed in the text hereafter.
36. In a Spinozistic form, with the things of this world being modes of God rather than substances.
37. With all things being uniﬁed, indeed, one, and having as their single essence ‘‘all primary
requisites,’’ which in turn appear, from comparison with other texts, to be simply the attributes or forms
of God. See, for instance, De Formis Seu Attributis Dei (A 6.3:513–515), and A 6.3:520. (The latter
suggests more simply that the collection of forms or attributes is the essence of God. A 6.3:514 brings in a
subject as well.) Thus, we would seem to have a one or a unity which is all things and which is divine.
38. There is not space in this essay to document the point in a suitable way. However, I have
attempted to document it in related essays. The fullest exposition appears in ‘‘Descartes, Spinoza, and
Leibniz on Real Distinction, Pluralism, and Monism,’’ unfortunately not yet published. But a briefer
statement is included in Kulstad 2001: 664–665. Occasionally, I have made use of bits of these essays in
the present one.
39. This is not too surprising in a paper that was never prepared for publication.
40. Hans Burkhardt has reminded me, in discussion, that many would label this Descartes’
‘‘epistemological criterion’’ of real distinctness. The corresponding ontological criterion is the one given
in Deﬁnition 10 of the ‘‘Geometrical Exposition’’ in the Second Replies (AT 7:162/CSM 2:114).
41. One possible difference between Leibniz and Descartes is suggested by a strict reading of
some of the earlier passages from both on real distinction. Whereas Deﬁnition 10 from Descartes is
clearly meant to give a necessary and sufﬁcient condition of real distinctness, a strict reading of, on the
one hand, Descartes’ statement on clearly and distinctly understanding one thing without another and,
on the other, of Leibniz’s statement on perfectly understanding one without another would seem to
lead to the conclusion that the former offers a sufﬁcient condition of real distinction; the latter a
necessary condition. Of course, if both intended to be giving a necessary and a sufﬁcient condition of
real distinction (and Descartes’ deﬁnition certainly encourages the thought that he, at least, had in
mind a necessary and sufﬁcient condition of real distinction), then the difference would be only
apparent.
42. In any case, Descartes uses the language of separation also: see the end of Principles 1.60.
43. From a paper entitled De Existentia.
44. Even in the one paper we are dealing with here, Quod Ens Perfectissimum Sit Possible, the talk
of ‘‘all afﬁrmative attributes’’ in ‘‘a most perfect being’’ (A 6.3:572/DSR 91) and of the ‘‘ultimate reason of
things,’’ which ‘‘contains by itself the aggregate of all requisites of all things,’’ suggests that the requisites
of the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage may be identiﬁed with the attributes of God. For more on requisites,
see Rutherford 1995a: 112–115 (although he is dealing with a later time period and with a slightly different
deﬁnition) and Adams 1994: 117–118 (who considers texts from Leibniz’s early years until the year of his
death).
45. Leibniz’s term quia (because/since) provides key textual support for the claim that lines 3 and
4 are expressed in the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage.
46. This seems not only implicit in Leibniz’s reasoning but also true.
47. Although this precise conclusion may not seem obvious in Leibniz’s text, I think it is there.
The speciﬁc passage I have in mind in support of this—‘‘in the case of things, this is not so’’—is a bit
opaque when taken out of context. But I think reﬂection on the statement, in context, will make it clear
that Leibniz afﬁrms the proposition expressed in line 7 of the reconstruction.
48. Strictly, the text has the two clauses joined by conjunction rather than by any kind of deﬁnitional connection. Thus, line 10 must be taken as something implicit in Leibniz’s argument rather
than explicit. But the suggestion is strong that Leibniz thinks there is such a connection between these
two clauses.

42 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
49. Strictly, Leibniz puts this as a conjunction rather than a conditional. The reconstruction gives
my best guess as to what Leibniz intends here. This is one of the interesting points connected with this
passage that unfortunately will not be taken up here for special discussion.
50. For more on this important matter, see Adams 1994: 129.
51. Leibniz doesn’t say this speciﬁcally in the paragraph in question, but ‘‘the aggregate of all
requisites of all things’’ that he does speciﬁcally talk about there, as being contained in ‘‘the ultimate
reason of things,’’ clearly suggests it. Adams (1994: 129) apparently reads it the same way. And elsewhere
in writings of the same time period Leibniz conﬁrms this. See, for example, A 6.3:519–20/DSR 79.
52. In an earlier version of this study, Mercer’s important research on this question (Mercer 1999:
283–295) had been presented and evaluated. Unfortunately, space limitations of this book precluded its
inclusion in the ﬁnal version. Very brieﬂy put, my response to her suggestion that ‘mode’ is here used in
a Platonistic sense is that the closeness of Leibniz’s language and concepts (especially real distinction,
which is deﬁned in this passage) to Descartes’ concepts of mode and of the real distinction of substances
suggests at least a Cartesian substance-mode relationship, if not necessarily a Spinozistic substancemode relationship.
53. That is, it follows if we take it that Leibniz includes God in the class of things talked about in the
‘‘all things are one’’ passage. But this is not necessarily certain. See Kulstad 2001: 667–668. So, to cover all
possibilities, assume for the moment that God is not to be counted as a thing in the sense of the ‘‘all things
are one’’ passage. Then the inference just given, in the most obvious way of drawing the conclusion, via
simple instantiation of the general principle that no things really differ, would be blocked. But there is
another way to proceed. Given the speciﬁc account of real distinction given by Leibniz in the ‘‘all things
are one’’ passage, one can still draw the conclusion that no things are really distinct from God, though not
as directly. Taking God as ‘‘the ultimate reason of things,’’ which ‘‘contains by itself the aggregate of all
requisites of all things’’ (A 6.3:573/DSR 93), (and perhaps adding a principle which both Adams and
Mercer endorse, that for Leibniz at this time the analysis of all things involves all attributes that are in the
divine essence [Adams 1994: 129; Mercer 1999: 282]) we may conclude, using lines 1 and 2 of the foregoing
argument, that no thing is really distinct from God. For (perhaps oversimplifying a bit—adding the
principle given a moment ago may be necessary), for any thing (excluding God) it is not the case that
all the requisites of that thing can be understood without all the requisites of God being understood,
taking these latter requisites to be all the attributes contained in the divine essence. So it is not the case
that the thing can be perfectly understood without God (via line 2). So the thing and God are not really
distinct (via line 1). Since the same argument applies for any thing, nothing is really distinct from God,
which means that the second clause of the deﬁnition of PantheismRD is satisﬁed.
54. See the preceding note.
55. See A 1.7:248–249, drawn from Sleigh 1990: 97.
56. I shall return to something like this possibility in my discussion of Adams hereafter.
57. For example, see Mercer 1999: 273, 275–276, 279, and 293.
58. Mercer also reads Adams this way (Mercer 1999: 279).
59. Adams 1994: 133–134. Recall that Adams had suggested earlier that in the ‘‘all things are one’’
passage, Leibniz is saying, ‘‘ﬁnite things are in God as ‘modes’ of the divine attributes’’ (126, with a
relation to 129). In Leibniz’s later position, as Adams sees it, things have changed: ‘‘creatures are not ‘in’
God’’ (133). This point is challenged in Mercer 1999: 279–90.
60. Adams 1994: 130 provides evidence for this.
61. He is quite clear, as we have seen, that a ‘‘Spinozistic’’ conception of God is not adopted by
Leibniz at this later time.
62. A 2.1:323; translation from Adams 1994: 130.
63. A 6.3:512; translation from Adams 1994: 130.
64. Or, if you wish, return to a case of two ﬁnite minds. Are they really distinct or only modally
distinct?
65. See Mercer 1999, 2000, and 2001.
66. Mercer 2000: 71 (the title) and 88–92.
67. In the case of the ﬁrst passage, it appears in a paragraph that follows immediately after
the laying out of a pantheistic ‘‘developmental story’’ of Leibniz’s youth, a paragraph that begins with the
statement that this story ‘‘is false’’ (Mercer 1999: 277).

The One and the Many 43
68. Mercer 1999: 279.
69. She cites Adams 1994: 128, but the reference seems to be to 130.
70. In Descartes’ theory of modal distinction, as presented in Principles 1.61, two modes of the
same substance differ modally, not really, from each other and from the substance. Although Leibniz’s
case of properties of an essence does not ﬁt this exactly, it is certainly related. And insofar as it does ﬁt,
the analogy points to things differing from each other and from God by a modal, not a real, distinction.
This is just the sort of thing that would be involved in PantheismRD and is the sort of thing we found in
the ‘‘all things are one’’ passage.

2

Leibniz and Sleigh
on Substantial Unity
CHRISTIA MERCER

obert C. Sleigh Jr.’s Leibniz and Arnauld: A Commentary on Their Correspon-

R dence is wonderfully Leibnizian. Sleigh creates a harmonized series of tightly

related components out of the complicated details that passed between Arnauld and
Leibniz in their correspondence (April 1686 to March 1690). Because Sleigh’s book
is a commentary on the letters that exchanged hands between Leibniz, Arnauld, and
their intermediary, Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels, Sleigh restricts his analysis of
Leibniz’s metaphysics primarily to the philosophical material contained in the letters. There are virtually no serious philosophical questions raised in the correspondence that are left unexamined. There are, however, some questions left unanswered.
The reason for this is not hard to identify: in the correspondence, Leibniz was neither
clear nor explicit about some of his most important views and there are no related
texts in which he offers neat answers to the relevant questions. In other words, there
are some questions that Sleigh left unanswered about Leibniz’s views, and these are
the questions to which Leibniz himself seemed either unable or unwilling to give answers to Arnauld.
In this essay, I would like to turn to one of the most important—and surely one
of the most intractable—of these difﬁculties, namely, the question of substantial
unity. I do not pretend to have greater insight into the underlying notion of
substance and unity as presented in the correspondence between Leibniz and
Arnauld and the Discourse on Metaphysics than did Sleigh. In fact, I consider it a
truth that if Sleigh works carefully through a text and does not make good sense of
a topic, then there is no sense to be made of the topic as presented in that text.
However, I would like to show here that once we place our topic within a wider
textual scope, and once we position the relevant texts within a broader intellectual
context, we can construct a satisfactory answer to some of the questions that arise
about substantial unity.
The cluster of problems surrounding the notion of unity have plagued Leibniz
scholars for a very long time. Between the correspondence with Arnauld (1686–90)
44

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity 45

and the Monadology of 1714, Leibniz is clear about the central role that unity plays
in his metaphysics, but he is rarely more than suggestive about how we are supposed to explain this crucial feature of substance. As with many of his core tenets,
however, Leibniz is much more explicit about his motivating assumptions in his
early works. When we turn our attention to the early period (roughly, 1666 through
1676) in which he is developing his ideas and working out the details of his system,
it is much easier to glimpse his underlying views about unity.
In the ﬁrst section that follows, I summarize the most important parts of Leibniz
and Arnauld: A Commentary on Their Correspondence concerning substantial unity.
Such a summary affords signiﬁcant insights into Leibniz’s ideas about unity. But
there are a few important questions left unanswered. Before turning to the early
works for help with these, it will be useful to situate the early writings in their proper
historical setting. The second section offers a brief outline of the relevant Platonist
background, and the third section turns to an analysis of the most important early
texts on the topic of substantial unity. More textual study needs to be done before a
full account of Leibniz’s views is available, but the materials of these early works
offer at least tentative answers to our questions about substantial unity.

Leibniz and Sleigh on Unity, Identity, and Substance
According to Sleigh, it is in the correspondence with Arnauld that Leibniz ‘‘ﬁrst
worked out in detail his conception of an individual substance and what he took to
be its philosophical consequences’’ (Sleigh 1990: 95). One of the assumptions that
underlies this conception of substance is that a substance is what is a unity per se.1
Although in the correspondence with Arnauld and the related Discourse on
Metaphysics, Leibniz says a great deal about substantial unity, some very important
questions remain insufﬁciently answered. Let’s consider the most signiﬁcant of
these.
As Sleigh makes clear, ‘‘the most stringent and exacting standards of substantial
unity’’ include incorruptibility, ingenerability, and ‘‘most signiﬁcantly’’ indivisibility (Sleigh 1990: 104). Leibniz writes to Arnauld in his letter of December 8, 1686:
‘‘Substantial unity requires a being that is complete, indivisible, and naturally indestructible,’’ and, moreover, this unity derives from ‘‘soul or substantial form.
These are the only true complete beings’’ (LA 76). As Sleigh is right to note, for
Leibniz, it is the soul or substantial form that confers the relevant sort of unity.
Leibniz is however frustratingly unhelpful about the exact means by which a soul or
substantial form produces a unity that is indivisible, ingenerable, and naturally
indestructible. Nor does he explain precisely why such beings are ‘‘the only complete’’ ones, or even exactly why this is important. We have here a set of questions
that concern both the nature and power of a substantial form: what is it about a soul
or substantial form F in a substance S that confers unity on S; how does this unity
guarantee the indivisibility, indestructibility, and ingenerability of S; in what sense
is S a complete being and how is this completeness related to its other features (e.g.,
the indivisibility)?

46 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

In his analysis of substantial forms in chapter 6, Sleigh offers important help
with these questions. He explains:
There are two central theses concerning the composition of corporeal substances—
one negative, the other positive—to which Leibniz held fast in the Discourse and
the correspondence. The negative thesis is that nothing whose essence is extension
is an individual substance. The positive thesis is that each created individual
substance, hence each corporeal substance, includes a substantial form. Leibniz
saw these theses as connected. He often wrote as if establishing the negative thesis
were tantamount to establishing the positive thesis. (Sleigh 1990: 116)

Since, for Leibniz, one of the main goals of the correspondence is to tempt ‘‘the
great Arnauld’’ away from Cartesianism and toward the metaphysics of preestablished harmony, it is not surprising that Leibniz is keen to show Arnauld the
various weaknesses of the Cartesian account of corporeal substance. As a means
to this goal, Leibniz is very concerned to show that something whose entire essence
is constituted by extensa is inadequate as a substance. Because Leibniz spends
so much time on this topic, so does Sleigh. Although many of these details are
enormously interesting, we can cut to the point most relevant to our topic, namely,
that anything (whether extended or not) that is divisible is a being by aggregation,
and that a being by aggregation is not a substance (Sleigh 1990: 119). Leibniz wants
to convince Arnauld that, whereas beings by aggregation admit of degrees, substances or beings with substantial unity do not. The former are a matter of convention; the latter are not (Sleigh 1990: 121). The former change constantly; the
latter remain the same uniﬁed thing throughout the course of their existence. That
is, it is a fundamental view of Leibniz that, in Sleigh’s words, ‘‘[n]o substance is
such that its unity and identity conditions are a matter of degree, a matter of
convention.’’ As Sleigh nicely puts it:
When [Leibniz] waxed most eloquent about substance, in contrast to various
pretenders, it is this fundamental intuition that is generating the steam: ‘‘I
maintain that one cannot ﬁnd a better way of restoring the prestige of philosophy
and transforming it into something precise than by distinguishing the only substances or complete entities, endowed with true unity . . . all the rest is merely
phenomena, abstractions or relations.’’ (Sleigh 1990: 121; LA 101)

For Leibniz in the correspondence with Arnauld, therefore, there are fundamental individuals and there are nonfundamental individuals. The latter are
aggregates, which are divisible, destructible, and temporary. They admit of degrees
in the sense that they can be more or less uniﬁed and more or less divisible
(e.g., a pile of rocks is more divisible than a piece of marble). Sleigh intends to
articulate the difference between the fundamental individuals and the aggregates,
and thereby to gain clarity on the nature of substantial unity. To this end, the
question to which Sleigh turns is ‘‘what did Leibniz take to be the relation between
an entity through aggregation and the entities that compose it, in virtue of which
the entity through aggregation can be said to be ‘a state of being of those entities
from which it is composed’?’’ In an attempt to answer this question, Sleigh cites
an essay related to the correspondence entitled General Notations (Notationes

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity

47

Generales), in which, as Leibniz explains, ‘‘[t]he chief point is this: an army
accurately considered is not the same thing even for a moment, for it has nothing
real in itself that does not result from the reality of the parts from which it is
aggregated’’ (Sleigh 1990: 123; Grua 323). Sleigh’s gloss on this point is as follows:
an aggregate is a state of being of those entities that compose it, in the sense that any
truth about the aggregate can be expressed in propositions that ascribe modes and
states to the composing entities without any need to refer to the aggregate itself. In
other words, I take Leibniz to be claiming that aggregates are logical constructions
from modes and states of the entities aggregated. Given this view of aggregates, it is
easy enough to see why Leibniz would accept the grounding principle. (Sleigh
1990: 123–124)

The grounding principle claims: ‘‘For any x, if x is a being through aggregation,
then there exists a decomposition D of x such that, for any y, if y is an element of
D, then y is not a being through aggregation’’ (Sleigh 1990: 121). Leibniz explains to
Arnauld part of the motivation behind the principle: ‘‘What constitutes the essence
of an entity through aggregation is only a state of being of those entities from which
it is composed; for example, what constitutes the essence of an army is only a state
of being of the men who compose it’’ (LA 96–97). For Leibniz, then, a being that is
divisible is one that is an aggregate, and an aggregate is something constituted of
nonaggregates, that is, things with substantial unity. A nonaggregate or something
with substantial unity is not divisible. To drive home this important point, Sleigh
offers the following passage written by Leibniz in an essay entitled Deﬁnitions of
Metaphysical and Logical Concepts:
[N]o entity that is truly one [Ens vere unum] is composed of parts. Every substance is indivisible and whatever has parts is not an entity, but only a phenomenon. From these considerations the ancient philosophers correctly attributed
substantial forms, such as minds, souls, or primary entelechies, to those things that
they said made up an Unum per se. And they denied that matter by itself is a
single entity [Unum Ens]. Certainly those things that lack these [substantial forms]
are no more a single entity [Unum Ens] than a pile of sticks. . . . Certainly, these
things do not remain the same more than a moment, whereas, by contrast, true
substances remain through changes. (Sleigh 1990: 124)

There is, then, an intimate connection between entities that are divisible and
entities through aggregation. As Sleigh explains: ‘‘An entity through aggregation is
an entity whose existence depends upon those entities from which it is aggregated,
in such fashion that a change in entities aggregated means a different entity
through aggregation’’ (Sleigh 1990: 124). As Sleigh summarizes the point: ‘‘The
feature common to divisible entities and entities through aggregation, to which
Leibniz wished to draw our attention, is this: such entities are wholes composed in
such a fashion that their identity conditions require a different whole for every
change in composition’’ (Sleigh 1990: 125).
Substances, however, are not like aggregates. They are truly one in the sense
that they are indivisible and remain the same thing through time. Leibniz insists
that each thing that is truly one has its own substantial form. An entity through
aggregation does not have its own substantial form. The underlying assumption

48 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

here is that a substantial form F of a substance S confers both unity and identity on
S. The problem is that Leibniz does not explain how this is supposed to work. That
is, nowhere in the Discourse or the correspondence with Arnauld does he explain
exactly how substantial forms perform this double metaphysical task. So, the important question to address is: what exactly is it about substantial form F of a
substance S such that F confers identity on S while it also confers unity?
Sleigh is perturbed by the unity- and identity-making powers assigned to
substantial forms, and for good reason. On the one hand, Leibniz endorses a
notion of corporeal substance according to which a substantial form (somehow)
constitutes a unity with its passive principle or body, which is itself constituted of
other corporeal substances; on the other hand, he does not explain how this
account is consistent with the indivisibility requirement. In his letters to Arnauld,
Leibniz makes clear that substances are capable of remaining the same uniﬁed
things although components of them come and go. Leibniz explains, for example,
that ‘‘ﬁre can transform an animal and reduce it in size,’’ although the animal
retains its identity (LA 156). In an attempt to make sense of Leibniz’s position,
Sleigh deﬁnes the term ‘composite entity’ as what refers to any individual, one
proper component of which is another individual; and he distinguishes between
what is divisible and what is deconstructible component-wise. While, for Leibniz,
substances are not divisible, they are deconstructible component-wise. But this is
all very odd. As Sleigh wonders: ‘‘What is the operative difference between being
divisible and being deconstructible component-wise on which Leibniz wished to
build so much metaphysics?’’ (Sleigh 1990: 126).
It is in an attempt to answer this question that Sleigh turns his attention to
Leibniz’s account of identity, which he considers to be the underlying issue. Sleigh
justiﬁes the transition from a discussion of unity and divisibility to one about
identity in the following way:
The real test is this: does the composite entity in question depend on each and
every one of its components for its existence? If the answer is yes, then we have no
substance; if the answer is no, we may have a substance. So divisibility is not really
the vital matter here; the vital matter is whether the particular entity in question
can remain the same entity over time while undergoing change of components.
Leibniz’s claim amounts to this: given a substantial form suitably related to various
components, we have a composite entity that can pass the test of remaining the
same through change of components; absent the form, we do not. (Sleigh 1990: 126)

According to Sleigh, our ‘‘task’’ is to unearth ‘‘the explanation’’ behind the distinction
between the sort of composite entity whose identity changes when its components do
and the sort whose identity persists even through changes in its components. Sleigh’s
point here is important. According to Leibniz in his correspondence with Arnauld, it
is the substantial form of a substance that confers both the unity and identity on the
substance. As noted earlier, one of the underlying questions here is: what exactly is it
about mind-like or soul-like substantial form F of a substance S such that F confers
identity on S while it also confers unity? In the light of Sleigh’s distinction between
divisibility and component change, we might revise this question as follows: what
exactly is it about mind-like or soul-like substantial form F of a substance S such that
F confers identity and unity on S despite changes in the components of S?

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity

49

In his attempt to uncover Leibniz’s views about identity, Sleigh calls attention
to some of the passages in which Leibniz seems to explain identity in terms of the
causal autonomy of substances. For Leibniz, explains Sleigh, ‘‘remaining numerically identical over time is a basic condition that the metaphysically ultimate
individuals of an acceptable substance ontology must satisfy’’ (Sleigh 1990: 128).
Here the underlying assumption is that, in those cases when an entity persists
despite component changes, the entity is one that ‘‘contains’’ all its predicates past,
present, and future. In a letter of December 1686, Leibniz calls such entities
‘‘complete’’ and explains that they ‘‘express’’ all of their states, ‘‘as the concept of a
substance must do’’ (Sleigh 1990: 126; LA 72). As Sleigh points out, Leibniz intends
to convince Arnauld that ‘‘any alteration in the properties’’ of a person ‘‘would yield
a different person’’ (Sleigh 1990: 128).
One of my original questions concerned what it meant for a substance to be
complete. As it turns out, Leibniz’s notion of completeness is more robust than
one might ﬁrst assume. He seems to identify completeness with causal autonomy
where the idea is that F confers causal autonomy on S, along with unity and
identity. The odd thing here is that F is supposed to confer unity, identity, and
completeness on S despite changes in the components of S. Clearly, for Leibniz,
substantial unity, identity, completeness, and causal autonomy are all closely
related and are grounded in the substantial form.
‘‘Much is at stake here,’’ and so Sleigh sets about analyzing more thoroughly
the notion of an individual substance that Leibniz presents to Arnauld (Sleigh
1990: 127–128). From Sleigh’s painstaking analysis, we can draw the following
conclusions. First, in the correspondence with Arnauld and related Discourse on
Metaphysics, Leibniz is prepared to embrace a view very like his later position,
according to which each substance has a ‘‘law of order’’ that ‘‘constitutes’’ the
substance. As Leibniz writes to Arnauld: ‘‘Each substance contains in its nature
the law by which the series of its operations continues and all that has happened or
will happen to it’’ (Sleigh 1990: 129; LA 136). The important point is that despite
substantial changes, the substance remains numerically the same as long as those
changes follow, in Leibniz’s words, ‘‘from its own nature’’ (Sleigh 1990: 129; Grua
323). According to Sleigh, this ‘‘account of substance’’ is ‘‘fresh in our period’’
(Sleigh 1990: 129) and was motivated by the rigorous conception of ‘‘what is involved in being an individual substance’’ (Sleigh 1990: 130).
The second conclusion to draw from Sleigh’s analysis of Leibniz’s account
of substantial identity is that the latter is consistent both with ‘‘the doctrine of
spontaneity’’ and with (what Sleigh calls) ‘‘the doctrine of superintrinsicalness.’’
The doctrine of superintrinsicalness describes how a property or state is related to
the individual substance that has it; the doctrine of spontaneity tells us how that
property or state was produced. Sleigh considers Leibniz’s views about spontaneity
to be helpful in explaining how the ‘‘law of order’’ is supposed to guarantee
the identity of a substance S. According to the doctrine of superintrinsicalness,
‘‘every individual has all its properties intrinsically.’’ As Sleigh puts it: ‘‘Consider an
individual x and a property f that x has; if f is such that, for any y, were y to lack f
then y would not be x, then let us say that x has f intrinsically’’ (Sleigh 1990: 57).
According to the doctrine of spontaneity, ‘‘the series of states, constituting the

50 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

history of an individual substance, must be generated by a relation of causality,
applied to its initial state’’ (Sleigh 1990: 129). It is important to Sleigh that ‘‘every
property included in the concept of an individual substance is intrinsic to that
substance’’ and ‘‘[t]hat an entity is an individual substance only if its series of states
may be generated by a relation of real causality applied to its ﬁrst state.’’ In the
correspondence with Arnauld, Leibniz’s original formulation of the doctrine is:
‘‘Every present state of a substance occurs to it spontaneously and is only a consequence of its preceding state’’ (Sleigh 1990: 134; LA 47). Given all this, Sleigh
then ‘‘speculates’’ that Leibniz regarded his doctrine of spontaneity as preserving
intrinsicalness ‘‘so that whenever some state f of x is a real cause of state g of x, then
if x has f intrinsically, x has g intrinsically’’ (Sleigh 1990: 130). For Sleigh, such
claims are ‘‘a consequence’’ of Leibniz’s rigorous conception of ‘‘what is involved
in being an individual substance’’ (Sleigh 1990: 130). Once we put these claims
together with the plausible assumption that ‘‘Leibniz supposed that the initial
state of any substance is intrinsic to it,’’ Sleigh proposes that we ‘‘attribute the
following view to Leibniz: every noninitial state of a substance has as its real cause
some preceding state of that substance; and, since every state of an individual
substance thereby turns out to be intrinsic to that substance, every state of that
substance (including its initial state) is included in, and in that sense a consequence of, its concept’’ (Sleigh 1990: 130). As we approach the climax of this part of
Sleigh’s analysis, it is worth quoting him at length. He writes:
Let us take stock of what ground has been covered and remains to be covered. Our
ﬁrst concern was how Leibniz differentiated between composites that are divisible
and those that are not. Careful scrutiny of Leibniz’s arguments in the correspondence suggested that that distinction turned on another—the one between
composite individuals that remain numerically the same through changes over
time and those that do not. So our question became: What conditions must an
entity satisfy according to Leibniz in order to remain numerically the same over
time? Our answer is that this condition obtains, according to Leibniz, if each
noninitial state of an individual has as its real cause some predecessor state of that
individual. On this interpretation, the doctrine of spontaneity is built into the
notion of an individual substance, according to Leibniz. Given the thesis that
the relation of real causality preserves intrinsicalness and the thesis that the initial
state of a substance is intrinsic to it, we reach the doctrine of superintrinsicalness.
Attempting to derive so much of Leibniz’s doctrine concerning individual substances from his conception of what is required for real unity—unity consistent
with remaining numerically identical through change—may seem excessive. But I
take heart from a letter from Leibniz to l’Hospital, dated July 1695. After rehearsing
the doctrines of spontaneity, world-apart, and marks and traces, Leibniz concluded, ‘‘The key to my doctrine on this subject consists in this consideration of
what is properly a real unity, Monas.’’ (Sleigh 1990: 130–131)

Sleigh’s analysis of Leibniz’s correspondence with Arnauld shows that Leibniz’s
demands about unity are closely related to other core tenets. We begin to see, for
example, that identity and completeness are intimately related to one another, and
to the law of the series, which itself may be seen to imply the doctrines of spontaneity

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity 51

and superintrinsicalness. I will return to the interrelations among these doctrines
later. For now, it is noteworthy that on the basis of his thorough study of the
correspondence with Arnauld and Discourse on Metaphysics, Sleigh is inclined to
see the doctrines of superintrinsicalness and spontaneity as ‘‘built into the notion of
an individual substance’’; and, moreover, he suggests that Leibniz’s understanding
of that notion is itself grounded in his assumptions about ‘‘real unity.’’
Sleigh next turns to the question of ‘‘the internal generator, in virtue of which
a substance produces its states in accord with its developmental law.’’ He identiﬁes
this internal generator with the substantial form of a substance, where the substantial form is ‘‘construed as a soul-like entity.’’ And he proposes that the ‘‘deep
thesis’’ that underlies the developmental law is ‘‘the doctrine of marks and traces.’’
As Leibniz writes in a letter of 1686: ‘‘Every individual substance always contains
traces of everything that has ever happened to it and indications of what will ever
happen to it’’ (Sleigh 1990: 131–132; LA 39). Sleigh proposes that we understand the
doctrine of marks and traces in terms of the intentions of a mind-like object:
‘‘Hence, only an entity that is a soul, or at least contains a soul, can satisfy the
condition imposed by the doctrine of marks and traces, and hence, reach the level
of an individual substance’’ (Sleigh 1990: 132). As Sleigh explains it: ‘‘Since past
and future states of a substance (or anything else) do not literally exist in the
present, they can be contained in the present state of a substance only intentionally, past states as the objects of memory, future states, as the objects of desire, or
at least expectation’’ (Sleigh 1990: 132). Moreover, the intentionality of mind-like
forms offers some help with their unity. As Leibniz writes in General Notations
about the topic of how a composite can have true unity: ‘‘What makes these parts
a unity in the case of man has attributes that cannot be made known without
something that binds them together, namely, the faculty of perceiving and desiring’’ (Sleigh 1990: 132; Grua 323). On the basis of Sleigh’s discussion of the numerical identity of substance, we may conclude the following: for each individual
substance S, there is a developmental law that itself is somehow generated by a
soul-like substantial form F and that ultimately depends on the marks and traces of
F; moreover, the doctrine of marks and traces is itself to be explained intentionally,
that is, by the memories and desires of the mind-like F.2
In this section, I have summarized the discussion of substantial unity in Leibniz
and Arnauld: A Commentary on Their Correspondence. Sleigh’s analysis of the
notion as Leibniz discusses it in the correspondence with Arnauld and the related
Discourse on Metaphysics makes genuine progress in uncovering the interconnections among Leibniz’s ideas about substantial unity, identity, and completeness.
But despite this success in excavating Leibniz’s views about substantial unity, some
fundamental questions remain unanswered. As noted, Sleigh’s account is based
entirely on texts in which Leibniz avoids explicit acknowledgment of some of his
underlying assumptions about unity. Therefore, the lack of resolution of some
signiﬁcant problems should not come as a surprise. But the unresolved problems do
come as a disappointment. We yearn to learn more about the underlying nature of
substance such that it produces its own unity, identity, and completeness.
From Sleigh’s analysis, we have discovered a good deal about what substantial
unities are not (they are not aggregates whose state of being is constituted of the

52 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

entities from which it is composed), about what substantial unities do (they change
components and yet remain the same), and about how their activities are directed
(given the initial state of a substance S, S follows its ‘‘law’’). Perhaps most dramatically of all, Sleigh makes it perfectly clear that the substantial form is the real
workhorse here: it is the mind-like substantial form that generates the completeness
and causal autonomy, that confers unity and identity on its substance, and that
contains the developmental law. Sleigh’s signiﬁcant suggestion is that underlying
all this is the mind-like substantial form with its memories and desires. This is all
genuinely important. But we remain in the dark about the underlying nature of the
mind-like substantial form such that it performs all these extraordinary tasks. That
is, we want to know more about how the substantial form F in a substance S acts to
accomplish so much. There are a number of related questions concerning both the
underlying nature of F and the various metaphysical feats that it achieves. The
most obvious of these are: by what means does F act and how does its activity
guarantee the indestructibility and ingenerability of S; how exactly does F contain
its developmental law and to what extent does the law constitute its nature; how
exactly does F bind the components of S together so that component change does not
affect the identity of S; can we clarify how the features of unity, self-sufﬁciency, and
causal autonomy are related in F; can we understand more about how the features of
completeness, self-sufﬁciency, and causal autonomy are related in F; and ﬁnally, is
Sleigh right to attach so much importance to the intentionality of F?
That the answers to some of these questions may signiﬁcantly affect the
coherence of Sleigh’s interpretation seems clear. Consider, for example, his
explanation of identity. For each individual substance, says Sleigh, there is a developmental law that itself is somehow generated by a soul-like substantial form and
that ultimately depends on the marks and traces of the individual; moreover, the
doctrine of marks and traces is itself to be explained intentionally, that is, by the
memories and desires of the soul-like substantial forms. While this helps to explain
the identity of the substantial form over time, its contribution to the problem of
unity is unclear if we take unity to be the relation that is supposed to exist between a
substantial form and its body or passive principle. For a substance S that is constituted of a substantial form F and a passive principle P where P is a collection of
corporeal substances, the unity formed between F and P remains mysterious. To use
the example Leibniz offered Arnauld, an animal that is submitted to ﬁre can decrease greatly in size while retaining its identity (LA 156). In such a case, Sleigh’s
account explains how the soul of the animal remains the same, but it does not
explain the unity between the soul and the body. Or to approach the problem in
another way, Sleigh’s discussion of the relation among the doctrines of spontaneity,
superintrinsicalness, and marks and traces is extremely helpful in revealing the
subtleties and complexities of Leibniz’s thinking about substance, but his analysis
also makes clear how intractable Leibniz’s views about unity are: as long as the
substantial form is taken to be a soul-like entity whose thoughts and intentions arise
entirely out of its own nature—that is, are intrinsic—it remains extremely difﬁcult
to see how such a self-sufﬁcient object could create a unity with its passive principle.
What exactly is the source of its metaphysical glue, and how are we to understand
the constancy of it? Minds are supposed to be eternal and indestructible. There is

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity

53

little help here in understanding Leibniz’s assumptions about the apparent indefatigability of minds.
In conclusion, despite Sleigh’s thoughtful analysis of Leibniz’s views as they
are presented to Arnauld, we remain unenlightened about how the mind-like
substantial form is supposed to perform some of its most fundamental metaphysical
tasks. Nor do other scholars succeed where Sleigh has failed. Recent accounts of
Leibniz’s views of substantial unity are no more enlightening.3 We therefore ﬁnd
ourselves sadly befuddled about this crucial part of Leibniz’s thought. But we need
not despair. As I said in the introduction to this essay, if Sleigh works carefully
through a text and does not make good sense of a topic, then there is no sense to be
made of the topic as presented in that text. Because Sleigh has not been able to
discern Leibniz’s underlying assumptions about unity in the Discourse on Metaphysics and correspondence with Arnauld, we are fully justiﬁed in looking to other
texts for answers to our questions. I propose that we turn to some of Leibniz’s early
writings in which he is working out his ideas about substantial unity, and that we
situate these early texts in their rightful philosophical context.

Platonist Assumptions about Being and Unity
In his discussion of some of Leibniz’s assumptions about unity, Sleigh identiﬁes an
idea that, as he puts it, ‘‘has had a remarkable hold on Western thought,’’ namely,
that ‘‘the fundamental individuals of an acceptable metaphysical system must have
unity and identity conditions independent of human convention; otherwise, our
metaphysical analysis has not reached bedrock’’ (Sleigh 1990: 121). This observation
about the fundamental signiﬁcance attached to substantial unity in the history
of philosophy is important, and worth pursuing in greater detail. Leibniz himself
encourages us in this pursuit. As quoted by Sleigh, Leibniz points out in Deﬁnitions
of Metaphysical and Logical Concepts that ‘‘the ancient philosophers correctly
attributed substantial forms, such as minds, souls, or primary entelechies, to those
things that they said made up a Unum per se’’ (Sleigh 1990: 124). As with so many
other aspects of Leibniz’s thought, a survey of the right historical texts helps to
identify some of the assumptions that underlie Leibniz’s own thinking about unity,
identity, and substantial form. A few choice examples from the history of Platonism
should be sufﬁcient to situate the young man’s views about these matters.4
In Plato’s Phaedo, Socrates explains to some of his friends why he is eager to
die. He argues, among other things, for the immortality of the soul. It is in this
context that Socrates explains to Cebes ‘‘that the soul is most like the divine—
deathless, intelligible, uniform, indissoluble, always the same as itself—whereas
the body is most like that which is human—mortal, multiform, unintelligible,
soluble and never consistently the same.’’5 Underlying Socrates’ argument is the
view that the soul is like the divine in that it is ‘‘pure and invisible’’ (80e). Or as
Socrates puts it later in the dialogue: ‘‘the soul must be proved to be indestructible
and immortal . . . it has great vitality and a godlike nature’’ (95c). For my purposes,
it is particularly important that the soul is divine-like, is indestructible, and remains
‘‘always the same as itself.’’

54 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

At the end of the ﬁrst section, I listed a number of questions about substantial
unity that needed to be addressed. One of these concerned how the features of
unity and self-sufﬁciency are supposed to be related in the mind-like substantial
form; another asked how completeness, self-sufﬁciency, and causal autonomy are
related in F. These passages from the Phaedo suggest that the divine-like nature of
soul guarantees its self-sufﬁciency and constitutes its completeness in that that
nature will never cease to be ‘‘the same as itself.’’ And it would seem to follow from
this sort of self-sufﬁciency that the soul would be indissoluble and ‘‘deathless.’’ The
idea that the soul—at least the human soul—stands between the mortal and the
divine becomes standard fare in the history of Platonism. Many Platonists assumed
that the soul’s divine-like status entailed its unity and vitality. Among the cluster
of intuitions here is the striking idea that the soul is the kind of thing that always
remains self-sufﬁciently itself. Its indestructibility and immortality are supposed
to follow from this. Before turning to one of the leading proponents of this idea, it
will be helpful to review some points about the relation between unity and selfsufﬁciency.
For many ancient thinkers, ontological priority was to be explained mainly in
terms of self-sufﬁciency. For Platonists, there was a hierarchy of self-sufﬁciency and
being such that each of the lower strata in the hierarchy was supposed to depend
on and be caused by the higher. In Plato’s Republic the sensible things depend on
the Ideas, which themselves depend on the Good. For many of the philosophers
who followed Plato, it was taken as obvious that unity and perfection were intimately related to self-sufﬁciency and being, so that the more reality something has,
the more uniﬁed and perfect it would be. Both Christian and non-Christian Platonists assumed that there is a supremely perfect, wholly simple, and uniﬁed being
on which all else depends. The implication was that only the highest being was
wholly perfect, self-sufﬁcient, simple, and real and that the beings in the lower
strata had diminishing degrees of these features. What is less a unity, for instance, is
less real and what is less real is constituted and explained by what is more uniﬁed
and hence more real. For many Platonists, unity was the key metaphysical notion
around which a number of beliefs clustered: that eternity and immutability are the
marks of true being and perfection; that utter unity or simplicity excludes the
possibility of parts and the possibility of change; that simplicity implies independence and self-sufﬁciency. From such assumptions it is supposed to follow that a
wholly uniﬁed being is eternally, immutably, and independently itself, but also
that whatever partakes of unity has an equal share of self-sufﬁciency.6
Even these brief comments7 about the proposals of Plato and other Platonists
constitute signiﬁcant help with the list of questions asked about substantial unity at
the end of the ﬁrst section. Within the Platonist tradition, we discern a cluster of
assumptions about the souls or active principles in nature: they are fundamentally
uniﬁed and self-sufﬁcient; their self-sufﬁciency constitutes a kind of metaphysical
completeness; this self-sufﬁciency and completeness entail indestructibility, indivisibility, and vitality; and they are somehow capable of sharing their unity and selfsufﬁciency with ‘‘lesser’’ beings.
The great ﬁfteenth-century Platonist Marsilio Ficino explains in his Platonic
Theology how the soul ‘‘causes life to be diffused among bodies.’’ For Ficino, the

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity

55

soul, which is ‘‘always alive,’’ shares its unity and self-sufﬁciency with the body and
thereby creates a harmony of components.8 In an attempt to explain the unifying
powers of the soul, Ficino writes that the soul ‘‘diffuses its vivifying shadow through
the division of body.’’ Although it remains ‘‘integral and simple,’’ the soul spreads
‘‘its indivisible power’’ to every single part of the body and thereby is ‘‘wholly’’
present to every part. It thereby gives its body its essence as an indivisible thing
(43v). That is, according to Ficino, because the soul is a constantly active divinelike power, it is fundamentally uniﬁed, self-sufﬁcient, and complete, and moreover
it communicates its ‘‘vivifying’’ and ‘‘indivisible power’’ to anything it diffuses.
But questions remain. The soul is supposed to be unextended (i.e., not in
space) and yet it is supposed to diffuse its power to every part of its body. In order to
explain the position of soul here, we need to turn brieﬂy to the Platonist doctrine of
emanation. Oversimplifying somewhat, we can say that: if A has an attribute f, then
A can emanate f-ness to a being B. In the emanative relation, A loses nothing while
B comes to instantiate f-ness. The emanative process is assumed to be continual so
that B will participate in f-ness and have f if and only if A acts or emanates f-ness. It
is important to emphasize the fact that, in the emanative causal relation, the f of A
is greater and more perfect than that of B and yet the f in B resembles its cause. For
early Platonists like Plotinus and Proclus, any act of production in the created
world is a case of ‘‘imitating the One.’’9
These brief comments about emanative causation offer some assistance with
one of the questions asked about substantial unity at the end of the ﬁrst section,
namely, how exactly does a mind-like substantial form F bind the components of a
substance S together so that component change does not affect the identity of S?
The answer suggested by Ficino is that S is constituted by F and the body over
which F has emanative power, so that regardless of the changes in its body, S
remains constantly itself. F binds together the components of S by emanating its
power to them; and it follows that the changes in S are merely the result of F
expanding or shrinking its emanative range. Although the soul effortlessly offers its
powers to all the parts of its body, the range of its diffusion may be more or less
expansive.
It would be interesting to analyze the views of the Platonists in greater detail,
but it remains my goal to discern Leibniz’s underlying assumptions about substantial unity. Despite the brevity of this historical material, we have made real
headway with our questions. We are well prepared to discern Leibniz’s underlying
ideas about unity and to construct more complete answers to our questions.

The Young Leibniz on Substantial Unity
From the very beginning of his long philosophical career, Leibniz endorsed the
Platonist assumptions just displayed. Although one of his main goals as a young
philosopher was to construct an account of substance that was recognizably Aristotelian, Leibniz was perfectly happy to combine Platonist assumptions about God
and the soul with Aristotelian ideas about substance. Brieﬂy put, Leibniz intended
to construct his theory of corporeal substance on the Aristotelian model, where a

56 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

substantial form or active principle combined with a material or passive principle
to constitute the fundamental entities of the created world.10 However, as so many
medieval and early modern Aristotelians had done before, Leibniz borrowed
heavily from the Platonist tradition for his views about God and the active principle in nature. For my purposes, it is particularly important to recognize that
Leibniz assumed that the mind-like substantial form would possess the whole
range of metaphysical powers described by Ficino. That is, for Leibniz—as for
Plato, Proclus, Plotinus, Ficino, and many others—the active principle in nature is
divine-like and therefore self-sufﬁcient, complete, and uniﬁed. It is as uniﬁed and
self-sufﬁcient as anything other than God can be.
From the outset of Leibniz’s philosophical career, we discern an intimate
connection between unity, self-sufﬁciency, and completeness, and we ﬁnd these
features ﬁrmly rooted in the activity and vitality of the active principles in nature.
Consider his ﬁrst account of the nature and activities of substance. In On Transubstantiation of 1668, he deﬁnes substance as ‘‘a being that subsists per se’’ and
then deﬁnes ‘‘a being that subsists per se’’ as ‘‘one that has a principle of action
within itself [in se]’’ (A 6.1:508/L 115). That is, in On Transubstantiation, we ﬁnd
the following signiﬁcant metaphysical commitment: the Principle of Substantial
Activity assumes that a being S is a substance if and only if it subsists per se and S
subsists per se if and only if it has a principle of activity within itself (in se). Also, in
this essay, Leibniz equates mind and substantial form and implies that the principle of activity is in the latter (e.g., see A 6.1:509). It follows that both the mindlike substantial form and the corporeal substance that it activates are self-sufﬁcient,
and therefore that the substantial form is itself a substance. Thus, from the beginning of Leibniz’s philosophical reﬂections, it is a mind-like substantial form that
is responsible for the activity and self-sufﬁciency of substances.
In other essays of the late 1660s, Leibniz conﬁrms this account of the activity
and self-sufﬁciency of substance, and offers more details. Signiﬁcantly, Leibniz’s
belief in the essential connection between the activity of mind on the one hand and
its unity, self-sufﬁciency, completeness, and indestructibility on the other dates from
his early postgraduate days. For example, in a published text of 1664, he discusses the
problem of the identity of individual things and considers a solution that assumes all
of these features of the active principle in nature. He speculates in Specimen of
Collected Philosophical Questions Concerning Law that the source of identity is the
vivens unum, the living unity or one, which is indivisible and acts as ‘‘a fountain of
life.’’ He notes that, ‘‘as the Rabbis maintain,’’ the soul is ‘‘like a little house in a
certain part of the body, which no power can destroy.’’11 The implications of this
early text are striking. First, the eighteen-year-old Leibniz suggests that vitality, selfsufﬁciency, and identity are all grounded in this living unity. Second, he commits
himself to the connection between these features and indestructibility. That is, the
assumption is that the vivens unum cannot be destroyed by any natural means. When
we combine these assumptions with the Principle of Substantial Activity, the implication is that, for each individual substance S, there is a soul-like substantial form
or vivens unum that guarantees the identity, self-sufﬁciency, indivisibility, and indestructibility of S. Finally, there is the provocative suggestion that this vivens unum
somehow resides in a body, in which it is eternally based and to which it gives life.

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity

57

That Leibniz thinks of the human soul as an indefatigable and eternal fortress
is conﬁrmed in other texts of the period. Consider, for example, the second part of
the Conspectus, entitled ‘‘Demonstration of the Immortality of the Soul, and of
Incorporality.’’ In this text of 1668–69, Leibniz lists several topics that at ﬁrst glance
are not related to immortality. Of the six subjects listed, only the ﬁnal one, a
discussion of the immortality of the soul, explicitly mentions immortality. The
other ﬁve topics concern the activity of mind where the assumption is that the
immortality of the soul is supposed to follow from the fact that only God can
destroy an active thing. Given the material of the second section, one of these is
particularly interesting: Leibniz intends to argue for the immortality of the soul
based ‘‘on self-motion, following Plato’’ (A 6.1:495). Or, as Leibniz further explains
in some notes that he took on the Phaedo in 1676: whatever ‘‘participates in life is
not able to be extinguished’’ (A 6.3:290). For the young Leibniz, therefore, only
God can destroy the active principles in nature, and once created, such principles
retain vitality. No natural thing can either corrupt or destroy them.
It would be very helpful to know more about the nature of this vital activity
that is somehow constant and indestructible. As noted earlier, Leibniz takes the
active principles in nature to be mind-like, and he often claims that they act
constantly.12 Although the young man makes few explicit comments about exactly
what this activity is, the evidence strongly suggests that he models the activity and
thinking of created minds on the activity and thinking of God, who acts by emanation. In brief, Leibniz follows his Platonist predecessors in modeling the nature
and activity of created minds on God. For example, in a note of 1671, he explains:
‘‘Just as God thinks things . . . because they follow from his nature, so does
Mind. . . . Mind and God do not differ except that one is ﬁnite and the other
inﬁnite.’’13 Although previous scholars have not paid adequate attention to this
important aspect of Leibniz’s thought, throughout his long life, he conceives of the
relation between God and creatures as emanative. Therefore, it should not come as
a surprise that he follows Platonists like Ficino in thinking of the activity of divinelike minds as one of emanation. As Leibniz explains in section 14 of Discourse on
Metaphysics: ‘‘it is evident that created substances depend on God, who preserves
them and who even produces them continually by a kind of emanation, just as we
produce our thoughts.’’14 Given that created minds act by emanation, it is not
surprising that they are ‘‘never depleted.’’ Or, as Leibniz makes the point to
Oldenburg, secretary of the Royal Society, in September 1670, the activity of mind
is ‘‘perpetual’’ (A 2.1:64).
It is this perpetual activity of mind-like substantial forms that guarantees the
self-sufﬁciency and completeness of substances. In a text written in conjunction
with On Transubstantiation and also of 1668, Leibniz articulates his original
understanding of substantial self-sufﬁciency. Against mechanical philosophers
like Gassendi and Descartes, who consider ﬁgure, motion, and magnitude to be
the primary qualities of bodies, Leibniz asks in Confession of Nature against the
Atheists: ‘‘[W]hat if I should demonstrate that the origin of these very primary
qualities themselves cannot be found in the nature of body? Then, indeed, I hope
that these naturalists will admit that body is not self-sufﬁcient [sibi non sufﬁcere] and
cannot subsist without an incorporeal principle.’’15 In fact, Leibniz’s original

58 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

rejection of the mechanical conception of body as res extensa rests on the assumption that extended stuff is insufﬁcient and incomplete by itself to explain
corporeal features. Leibniz argues that because ‘‘the same matter is indeterminate as
to any deﬁnite ﬁgure . . . no complete reason [plena ratio] for the ﬁgure will ever be
given’’ (A 6.1:490/L 110–111). The only way to avoid this unacceptable conclusion is
to insist that there is ‘‘an incorporeal being’’ that acts to organize the matter of the
body and thereby constitutes a ‘‘complete reason’’ for such corporeal features. For
my purposes, Leibniz’s argument against the ‘‘naturalists’’ is less important than his
promotion of his own views of self-sufﬁciency and completeness. We can extract the
following two signiﬁcant metaphysical commitments from the argument in the
Confession of Nature. First, the Principle of Substantial Self-Sufﬁciency assumes
that a being S is a substance if and only if S is self-sufﬁcient and moreover S is selfsufﬁcient if and only if the complete reason (ratio) for its features can be discovered
in the nature of S. Second, the notion of a complete reason (ratio) assumed in these
principles, may be put as follows: for some state or feature f, a complete reason
(ratio) of f constitutes the necessary and sufﬁcient condition for f.
Among the questions left unanswered at the end of the ﬁrst section were those
that concerned the relation between the completeness, self-sufﬁciency, and causal
autonomy of the substantial form F. The conjunction of the Principle of Substantial Self-Sufﬁciency and the Principle of Substantial Activity suggests a good
deal about Leibniz’s original understanding of the relation between activity, selfsufﬁciency, completeness, and causal autonomy. The principles display the two
separate tasks that the substantial form F in a substance S is supposed to perform.
First, F has an internal source of activity or principle of activity, which keeps F
constantly active and therefore self-sufﬁcient. As we have seen, this self-sufﬁciency
guarantees the indivisibility and (natural) indestructibility of F. Second, the substantial form seems to possess something that directs its activities. Whereas the
principle of activity acts constantly, the directive device (as yet unspeciﬁed) instructs the principle on how to behave.
It is important that the activities of F must somehow involve its body or passive
principle and create a substantial nature with it. It is surely noteworthy that, from
the beginning of Leibniz’s ruminations about metaphysical matters, he seems to
assume that (1) substances are complete in the sense that they offer a complete
reason or explanation for (at least) their (primary) features, and moreover that (2)
this completeness is to be grounded in the nature of the substance, that is, in the
unity formed by the active and passive principles. In his analysis of Leibniz’s notion
of substantial unity, Sleigh worried about ‘‘[a]ttempting to derive so much of
Leibniz’s doctrine concerning individual substances from his conception of what is
required for real unity’’ (Sleigh 1990: 130–131). In particular, Sleigh’s analysis of
identity and completeness led him to posit spontaneity and superintrinsicalness. As
a conﬁrmation and extension of Sleigh’s point, the early works show that the young
Leibniz intended to construct a tightly uniﬁed substantial nature out of a mind-like
substantial form and a passive principle, and by such means to offer a complete
reason for every natural occurrence.
In a work of 1669–70, Leibniz offers details about how this substantial nature
is supposed to be formed. In On the Incarnation of God, or On Hypostatic Union,

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity 59

which is surely the most important text for my purposes, Leibniz presents an account of substantial unity. Although the explicit goal of the essay is to explain how
the divine and human natures of Christ can form one substance, Leibniz displays
a theory of substantial unity more generally. The text is worth quoting at length.
According to Leibniz, the things that ‘‘are able to be uniﬁed hypostatically’’ are:
1) God and mind, 2) Mind and Body, 3) Body and Body through a common mind.
Body and Body are not able to be uniﬁed in themselves hypostatically, because no
Body subsists in itself. Mind and Mind are not able to be uniﬁed hypostatically,
unless as perfect and imperfect because imperfect mind [i.e., created mind] does
not act outside of itself unless through Body. . . . Moreover, created Mind . . . is not
uniﬁed with every body, but just to the one in which it has been rooted and from
which it cannot be separated. E.g. in the human body it should not be thought
that the soul is uniﬁed hypostatically to all the little bodies which are in it, because
they change perpetually, but [the soul] inheres in the center of the brain in a
certain ﬁxed and inseparable ﬂower of substance, most subtly mobile at the center
of the animal spirits, and [the soul] is uniﬁed substantially so that it may not be
separated by death.16

Leibniz makes ﬁve claims in this passage that are especially relevant to my present
concerns. They are:
(1) if x and y are uniﬁed hypostatically, then either x or y subsists per se;
(2) created mind cannot act outside itself except though body;
(3) if x and y are uniﬁed hypostatically, then either x or y acts outside
itself (through the other);
(4) every created mind has a body to which it is uniﬁed hypostatically;
(5) created mind is uniﬁed hypostatically with a body if and only if it is
rooted in that body and cannot be separated from it.

Leibniz continues his essay by asserting the following:
(6) ‘‘there is no hypostatical union except by means of the activity of the
one on the other’’; i.e., if x and y are (presently) uniﬁed hypostatically, then one is (presently) acting on the other;
(7) minds ‘‘have in themselves a principle of acting’’;
(8) ‘‘every action [of God] on body is one of creation’’;
(9) x and y are uniﬁed hypostatically if and only if (a) ‘‘one of them
acts constantly by a special ratio of action [actus] on the other’’ and
(b) ‘‘one of them is the other’s immediate instrument of acting’’
(A 6.1:533–534).

God is hypostatically uniﬁed with created minds in that the perfect mind acts
constantly on the imperfect ones so that each of the latter is God’s ‘‘instrument.’’
God is not, however, hypostatically uniﬁed with bodies: although God constantly
creates bodies, the divine mind is not the principle of the activity in an individual
body nor is the body its immediate instrument of acting. Leibniz writes: ‘‘For truly
the instrument of God is Mind, uniﬁed with God by means of which God acts on
bodies other than by creating’’ (A 6.1:534). For my purposes, it is signiﬁcant that,
besides giving each mind its own principle of activity, Leibniz also suggests in this
essay that God imposes on each mind ‘‘a ratio of action’’ so that the mind may act

60 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

as ‘‘the instrument’’ of God.17 Leibniz offers the following summary of some of the
claims made previously: ‘‘if A is [that which does] the unifying and B is that which
is said to be uniﬁed, then (a) A is a thing subsisting per se, (b) A acts through B in
C, (c) A acts immediately in B or [seu] not through another.’’18
Thus, according to Leibniz in On the Incarnation of God, for some mind-like
substantial form F and some body or passive principle P, F and P are hypostatically
uniﬁed just in case: F subsists per se (claim [1]), but only acts outside itself through
the other; the passive principle need not subsist per se, but is the means by which F
acts when it acts outside itself (claim [3]). Although God does not need a passive
principle through which to act, F does (claim [2]). This means that all the activity
in the natural world reduces to that of minds and bodies in hypostatic union.
Moreover, it is not enough that the substantial form acts some of the time, it must
act constantly on the passive principle. The idea seems to be that when the acting
stops, so does the union (see claims [6] and [9]). Thus, Leibniz asserts in claim (9)
that x and y are hypostatically uniﬁed if and only if the active principle acts
constantly on the passive principle and that the latter is its ‘‘immediate instrument’’
of acting. By such means, we have arrived at two of Leibniz’s most basic assumptions about substantial form, namely, that it acts constantly and moreover that
it only acts outside itself through its passive principle.
In the remainder of the essay, Leibniz goes on to make an extraordinary claim,
namely, that ‘‘there is no thought [cognitio] without a union because to render that
which is thought [cognitum reddere] is itself an action of the one on the other.’’19
Thus, according to Leibniz:
(10) created mind always thinks (cognoscere);
(11) thought (cognitio) requires a union because to render the thing
thought is itself an action of the one on the other (i.e., the formation of a thought requires an action of mind on body);
(12) therefore, created mind must always be hypostatically uniﬁed with
its body.

The main part of On the Incarnation of God offers a thorough account of the
substantial unity forged by the mind and its body. Before mind will succeed at its
assigned task, namely, to forge a unity with its body, four conditions must be met.
First, according to Leibniz, each individual created mind has its own principle of
activity (claim [7]) by which it acts constantly. Second, it has its own ‘‘special ratio’’
(claim [9a]). That is, the active principle or mind-like substantial form in a corporeal
substance is fundamentally an active thing with its own set of instructions or ‘‘special
ratio’’ in terms of which it acts. Third, when the mind acts, which it always does, it
acts on its body. Finally, the result of each of these activities is a thought (although
there may also be other results). It will be helpful to consider these features of mind
and its relation to body in more detail.
The mind-like substantial form has its own principle of activity by means of
which it acts constantly and its constant activities are always on its body or passive
principle. By combining mind and body in this way, Leibniz has cleverly managed to
create a single unit out of active and passive principles. His strategy is straightforward:
a real substantial union between the principles depends on the constant activity of the

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity 61

one on the other because the constancy of the union of the two depends on the
constancy of the connection between them. Since the two principles will cease to be
a union when they cease to be connected and since constant activity assures constant
connection, Leibniz’s account of substantial union requires constant activity. Thus,
the hypostatic union of the principles critically depends on two features of mind: that
mind constantly acts and that each mind cannot act outside of itself except through
the body in which it is rooted.
A comparison to organic unities may be helpful at this point. If one understands an organic unity to be composed of substantial form and matter, then it is
easy to see why unity requires constant activity: if the activity involved in maintaining the organic unity stops, so does the unity. We would generally agree that
when the maintenance of the organization ceases (e.g., the heart stops, the liver no
longer functions), the unity of the substantial form and matter does so as well (e.g.,
the entity dies, the formerly organized body becomes a heap of decaying ﬂesh).
The nature of organic unities also helps us to understand what Leibniz means
when he says that the active principle cannot act outside itself except through the
passive: in order to act externally, the source or cause of the organization has to act
through the passive principle that it organizes.
The mind-like substantial form, besides having a principle of activity by means
of which it acts constantly, also has ‘‘a special ratio’’ that (somehow) directs its
actions. Leibniz explains at least part of his motivation: ‘‘For truly the instrument
of God is mind.’’ The suggestion is that God constructs individual substantial
forms so that they act according to their divinely arranged instructions. The proposal here seems to be a more developed version of the idea found in Specimen of
Collected Philosophical Questions Concerning Law. In that text of 1664, Leibniz
intended to offer the vivens unum as the source of substantial identity. In On the
Incarnation of God, he is prepared to give every mind-like substantial form a set of
instructions by which it acts and maintains its identity.
Among the questions left unanswered by Sleigh’s analysis of substantial unity,
one concerned the matter of how the mind-like substantial form F was supposed to
contain its developmental law and to what extent the law constituted the nature of
F. On the Incarnation of God offers signiﬁcant help with this topic. I said earlier
that Leibniz has assigned F two tasks: to act constantly and to direct its activities.
While the principle of activity easily fulﬁlls the ﬁrst task, we now see that it is the
developmental law or ‘‘special ratio’’ that accomplishes the second. It would seem
to follow then that each substantial form is the same insofar as it contains a divinelike vivens unum. What individuates one substantial form from another and what
makes it complete in the relevant sense is its ‘‘special ratio.’’ That is, each substance will be (in Plato’s terms) ‘‘always the same as itself ’’ because of the law by
which it acts.
There are two more points to emphasize about the features of mind and its
relation to body as presented in the main part of On the Incarnation of God. Both
concern the nature of the unity of the substantial nature. In the Confession of
Nature against the Atheists, we witnessed Leibniz’s demand that each substantial
nature offer a complete reason or explanation for its features (at least the primary
ones). The account of substantial union presented in On the Incarnation of God

62 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

easily attains that goal. Leibniz has constructed the substantial union between the
mind and body so that, for any feature f of the corporeal substance S, f results from
the organization of the passive principle in S and moreover this organization
occurs if and only if the mind acts through the passive principle. While the mind is
the source of activity, the body is what mind organizes: each is necessary and both
are sufﬁcient for the corporeal feature f. By combining mind and body in this way,
Leibniz has cleverly managed to create a single corporeal nature.
Finally, the nature of the union forged between the active and passive principles in On the Incarnation of God is such that the result of the activities of this
substantial unity are thoughts. That is, according to Leibniz in this essay, when
minds act constantly on their bodies, what they produce are thoughts.20 This point
brings us to another question raised at the end of the ﬁrst section. We wondered
there whether or not Sleigh is right to attach so much importance to the intentionality of the mind-like substantial form. It would appear that in Leibniz’s
original attempt to work out the details of his views about substantial unity, he was
already thinking about unity in intentional terms.21
The proposals in On the Incarnation of God are important and contain signiﬁcant details about the young Leibniz’s views about substantial unity. The essay
also makes some provocative remarks about the mind’s relation to its body. Among
the questions left unanswered at the end of the ﬁrst section, the one I have yet
to consider concerns the thorny matter of component changes. As I asked the
question there, how exactly does the substantial form F in a substance S bind the
components of S together so that component change does not affect the identity
of S? Or, to pose the more general question: what exactly is it about mind-like or
soul-like substantial form F of a substance S such that F confers identity and unity
on S despite changes in the components of S? As noted at the end of the ﬁrst
section, this is a serious problem and one that poses potential difﬁculties for
Sleigh’s account. For each individual substance, says Sleigh, there is a developmental law that itself is somehow generated by a soul-like substantial form. While
the developmental law helps to explain the identity of the substantial form over
time, its contribution to the problem of unity is unclear if we take unity to be the
relation that is supposed to exist between a substantial form and its body or passive principle. For a substance S that is constituted of a substantial form F and a
passive principle P where P is a collection of corporeal substances, the unity
formed between F and P remains mysterious. As Leibniz pointed out to Arnauld,
an animal that is submitted to ﬁre can decrease greatly in size while retaining its
identity (LA 156). Sleigh’s account helps to explain how the soul of the animal
remains the same, but it does not account for the unity between the soul and the
body. Moreover, as long as the substantial form is taken to be a soul-like entity
whose thoughts and intentions arise entirely out of its own nature—that is, are
intrinsic—it remains extremely difﬁcult to see how such a self-sufﬁcient object
could create a unity with its passive principle.
In On the Incarnation of God, Leibniz offers some clues about how we might
answer the question about component change. He writes in a passage already
mentioned: ‘‘it should not be thought that the soul is uniﬁed hypostatically to all
the little bodies which are in it, because they change perpetually, but [the soul]

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity 63

inheres in the center of the brain in a certain ﬁxed and inseparable ﬂower of
substance . . . so that it may not be separated by death’’ (A 6.1:533). But what is this
‘‘ﬂower of substance’’ and how is the soul permanently attached to it? According
to Ficino, the soul is related to its body by means of emanation where the idea
is that its power diffuses all the parts of that body. For Platonists like Ficino, God
emanates the divine power to souls, which accordingly have that power (though
in an inferior manner) and can then emanate it to their bodies. When the soul
diffuses its body, it loses none of its emanative causal power and yet enlivens
its body. For the young Leibniz, both the activity of mind and the relation
between mind and body is to be understood along similar lines.22 Although
previous scholars have not noticed this feature of the early texts, there is clear
evidence that, for the young Leibniz, the activity of mind is one of emanation
and moreover that minds diffuse bodies in much the same way that God diffuses
creatures. That is, whether the mind in question is the inﬁnite mind of God or
the ﬁnite minds of nature, mind acts through emanation and ‘‘without being
diminished.’’23
Fortunately, there is ample evidence of this account of substantial unity.
Leibniz summarizes his position in a letter to Johann Friedrich of May 1671: ‘‘I am
of the opinion that in a body, whether of a human being or animal, vegetable or
mineral, there is a core [Kern] of its substance. . . . This core is so subtle that it
remains also in the ashes of burned things and can, so to speak, draw itself into an
invisible center’’ (A 2.1:108). In a fascinating essay that Leibniz attached to this
letter, he offers crucial details about this ‘‘core’’ of substance. In this text, entitled
On the Resurrection of the Body, Leibniz employs the same Latin verb used by
Ficino (i.e., diffundere) to describe the relation between the soul and its body. He
writes: ‘‘in everything there is a certain seminal center that is diffused throughout
the thing.’’ This center is ‘‘the fountain of life’’ and that ‘‘in which the very soul is
implanted.’’ The ‘‘subtle spirit or substance’’ cannot be destroyed but will survive
through ﬁre and other changes as ‘‘the ﬂower of substance’’ (A 2.1:116).
In the theological context of resurrection, it is not surprising that Leibniz
should be concerned to show that the soul remains eternally attached to its body.
Since the Christian doctrine demands that the human soul will be resurrected with
its body, the believing Christian wants to rest assured that come Judgment Day, it
will be her body (and not someone else’s) that accompanies her soul through the
Pearly Gates. Leibniz has constructed the core of substance to satisfy exactly these
demands. In fact, Leibniz is proud of his theory and insists that it has many
beneﬁts. Besides solving the problem of resurrection, it explains ‘‘the generation of
plants from seeds,’’ the ‘‘development of the seed in the uterus,’’ and ‘‘the essences
of chemicals’’ (A 2.1:116); it is also consistent with the radical theological demands
of the doctrine of the Eucharist.24 Moreover, Leibniz is proud that his theory
agrees with ‘‘the Jews.’’ He writes: ‘‘Indeed, the Jews maintain that, in a certain
little bone, which they call Luz, the soul with this ﬂower of substance remains
unconquered by anything that happens’’ (A 2.1:117; see also A 6.1:91). For the young
Leibniz, whether it is the development of a crystal, the generation of a plant, the
movement of an object, or the resurrection of the body, the same process occurs:
there is a core of substance that diffuses the thing.

64 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Leibniz’s notion of a core of substance is constructed so that each human
substance will retain both its soul and its body from its birth to its death and for all
eternity.25 Roughly speaking, the idea is that the soul remains eternally uniﬁed with
a passive principle through which it acts. That is, for every substance S, there will be
a substantial form F and a passive principle P. Although P can be more or less
expansive, there will be some part of it, say, Pd, that remains invariably attached to F
and through which F always acts. Following Leibniz’s use of the verb ‘to diffuse’
(diffundere), let’s call the relation between the active and passive principles one of
diffusion. From Leibniz’s comments, we can interpret the relation as follows. For a
substantial form F of a substance S, F diffuses its passive principle P just in case F
has constant causal power over P. That is, like his Platonist predecessors, Leibniz
intends the mind-like substantial form F in a substance S to diffuse the components
of its passive principle. In the discussion of Ficino’s views about substantial unity in
the second section, I showed that the soul is supposed to diffuse its unifying and
vivifying powers to various parts of its body. For Ficino, the changes in the components of a substance S are merely the result of the substantial form F expanding or
shrinking its emanative range. Leibniz’s view is strikingly similar except that he
constructs a core of substance through which this emanation of unifying power
must occur. That is, as Leibniz has constructed the core of substance, F remains
eternally rooted in Pd and the diffusion of P by F will always occur through Pd. It is
in this sense that the core is ‘‘the ﬂower of substance.’’ In the letter to Johann
Friedrich, Leibniz explains that the core is like ‘‘an embryo or seed of an animal
[dem foetu oder frucht der Thiere],’’ which contains ‘‘the core of the whole body.’’ He
insists that ‘‘this core of the substance of a human being neither increases nor
decreases although its clothing and casing [Kleidt und Decke] are in constant ﬂux.’’
These ﬂuctuations can be extreme. Not only is ‘‘the core of the whole body’’ able to
spread throughout the body, it is also able to ‘‘retract itself back to its source and
fountain’’ where it is in a state of such subtlety that ‘‘no force . . . is able to damage it’’
(A 2.1:108–109). In the discussion of the resurrection of the body, it is not surprising
that Leibniz is keen to explain some of the more dramatic changes that, as Christian
doctrine insists, every human being will suffer in the eternity of existence.
Leibniz’s theory of a core of substance is enormously clever: it explains how a
substance is able to remain fundamentally the same and yet undergo the changes of
natural growth and supernatural resurrection. And the diffusion relation constitutes
a neat account of the unity formed between the active and passive principles,
regardless of the changes in components. In every diffusion relation between a
mind-like substantial form F and a body or passive principle P, each of the components of P contributes to the unity of the whole by acting according to the
emanations of F through Pd. For example, in the case of an individual human
substance, the person grows from infant to adult, then dramatically shrinks and
expands between the moments of death and resurrection. Underneath these variations in the passive principle stands the core. Because the core of the substance is
constituted by a self-sufﬁcient soul and a passive principle through which the soul
constantly acts, the core of the human is ripe for life, death, and even resurrection.
For Leibniz in 1671, whether it is the generation of a plant, the growth of an
adolescent, or the resurrection of the body, the same process occurs (A 2.1:116).

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity 65

Conclusion
According to Sleigh, in Leibniz and Arnauld: A Commentary on Their Correspondence, it was in the correspondence with Arnauld and the Discourse on
Metaphysics that Leibniz ‘‘ﬁrst worked out in detail his conception of an individual
substance and what he took to be its philosophical consequences’’ (Sleigh 1990:
95). The material of the third section herein suggests, however, that Leibniz had a
conception of substance in his early period, and that the young man was keen to
unpack the weighty metaphysical implications of Platonist ideas about mind, activity, completeness, self-sufﬁciency, and unity.26 It is not surprising therefore that
the texts of Leibniz’s early period (roughly, 1666–76) offer signiﬁcant help with
questions left unanswered in the correspondence with Arnauld and the Discourse
on Metaphysics. Once we place Leibniz’s early ruminations about substantial unity
in their rightful philosophical context, we can begin to discern his underlying
assumptions about the power of the active mind-like principles of nature to confer
unity, self-sufﬁciency, and completeness on substances. A brief review of these
assumptions is in order.
One of the most difﬁcult questions left unanswered by Sleigh’s analysis involved how the mind-like substantial form F in a substance S could confer unity.
The conferral of unity on S was supposed to guarantee the indivisibility, indestructibility, and ingenerability of S, and to allow S to retain its identity despite
changes of components. Following his Platonist predecessors, the young Leibniz
assumes that the divine-like nature of the active principle constantly acts through
emanation so that it remains (in Plato’s words) ‘‘constantly itself ’’ and thereby is
incapable of division, generation, and destruction (by anything but God). Leibniz
also takes it for granted that this mind-like form can act more or less expansively
and that it is eternally rooted in a passive principle from which it cannot be
severed. Although from my philosophical perspective, the divine-like nature of F
remains (mostly) unfathomable, there may be some comfort in the fact that, for
Leibniz and many of his contemporaries, the nature of mind was unfathomable
exactly because it was divine-like (e.g., A 2.1:113; A 6.1:492–493). Despite the absence of an entirely plausible account of the activity of mind-like forms, the materials of Leibniz’s early period contribute signiﬁcantly to our understanding of the
indivisibility, ingenerability, indestructibility, and constancy of substantial unities.
The early works have also helped with questions involving the interrelations
among self-sufﬁciency, completeness, causal autonomy, and the developmental
law. What we discovered was that each substantial form contains its own principle
of activity by which it acts and a ‘‘special ratio’’ or set of instructions that directs its
activities. The former guarantees the self-sufﬁciency of S; the latter constitutes the
completeness of S because it directs the substantial form F as F creates and
maintains a unity with its passive principle. By such means, S retains its identity
and self-sufﬁciency.
In conclusion, Sleigh’s analysis of substantial unity in the correspondence with
Arnauld and the Discourse on Metaphysics contributes signiﬁcantly to our understanding of many of the subtleties of Leibniz’s metaphysics. Once we place the

66 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

questions that remain from that study in an appropriately broad textual and contextual scope, we begin to discern Leibniz’s underlying assumptions about the
power of the active mind-like principles of nature to confer unity, self-sufﬁciency,
and completeness on substances. Although more textual study needs to be done
before a full account of Leibniz’s later views is available, the analysis presented
here constitutes a ﬁrst attempt to construct a thoroughgoing account of Leibniz’s
theory of substantial unity.

Notes
I thank Don Rutherford and Jan Cover for helpful comments on this essay, and the National
Endowment for the Humanities for support during my research.
1. Among scholastic philosophers, there is a standard distinction between unity per se and unity per
accidens. Although there is some disagreement about how to account for each, the Latin per se implies that
the feature (in this case, unity) has its source in the nature of the substance and is essential. It was common
for seventeenth-century German philosophers to deﬁne unity per se in terms of ens (being) where the
assumption is that every substance has ens and everything that has ens has unity per se. As Leibniz puts it to
Arnauld: ‘‘I cannot conceive of any reality without true unity’’ (LA 97). It is in this sense that a unity per se is
a substantial unity. Unity per se is contrasted with unity per accidens because the latter does not arise from
the being of the substance, but from something else (say, the coordination of parts). For Leibniz’s rough
contemporaries on this topic, see, e.g., Weidling 1696: tab. 2; Stier 1641: cap. 3; Stahl 1655: tab. 14. In the
correspondence with Arnauld, Leibniz insists that an accidental unity or a unity per accidens is ‘‘a phenomenal unity’’ and exists ‘‘by opinion, convention’’ (LA 101). See Sleigh 1990: 120–121.
2. At the end of his discussion, Sleigh poses a few questions that arise about his conclusions. One
of these concerns how memory is supposed to work. Sleigh’s analysis of the doctrine of marks and traces
requires that every substantial form ‘‘remember’’ its past states. A question arises about how nonconscious
souls can do this. Sleigh’s answer to the question is based on a distinction that Leibniz sometimes makes
between ‘‘the sheer reoccurrence of a previous perception, unaccompanied by consciousness of past perception’’ and a memory ‘‘which is remembrance accompanied by consciousness of past perception’’
(Sleigh 1990: 133). It would seem that memory of the former sort is available to nonconscious minds.
3. See, e.g., Adams 1994; Rutherford 1995a. In ‘‘Leibniz to Arnauld: Platonic and Aristotelian
Themes on Matter and Corporeal Substance,’’ Martha Bolton raises the question that I have noted here
about substantial form and substantial unity. I would like to thank Bolton for a prepublication copy of
that article (Bolton 2004), which takes a different approach to the question from mine.
4. It is virtually impossible to trace the precise sources of Leibniz’s ideas. A number of previous
scholars have noticed vaguely ‘‘Platonist themes’’ in Leibniz’s philosophy, but no one has analyzed these
with any precision. See, e.g., Belaval 1962; and most recently Bolton 2004. However, as I have recently
argued, a (primarily) Plotinian form of Platonism contributed signiﬁcantly to the development of some
of Leibniz’s fundamental tenets. For more on Leibniz’s Platonism and its role in his philosophical
evolution, see Mercer 2001: chaps. 5–6.
5. Plato 1997: 80a–e. Besides Plato, Leibniz was thoroughly familiar with the entire history of
Platonism. Jakob Thomasius, who was the young man’s ‘‘master’’ during his studies in Leipzig, wrote
extensively on the history of philosophy. For Thomasius’s erudition on Platonism, see, e.g., his Schediasma Historicum and Exercitatio de Stoica Mundi Exustione. For more about Thomasius, see Mercer
2001: chaps. 1, 3; Mercer 2004; Bodéüs 1993.
6. The great third-century Platonist Plotinus (204/5–270) is particularly helpful on these points.
He writes about the supreme being, e.g., ‘‘[f ]or if it is not to be simple, outside all coincidence and
composition and really one, it could not be a ﬁrst principle, and it is the most self-sufﬁcient, because it
is simple.’’ Moreover, ‘‘what is not simple is in need of its simple components so that it can come into
existence from them’’ (Plotinus 1990: 5.4.1.6–15). Also see Plotinus 1990: 3.8.10.20–26; 6.2.11.9–18;
6.9.1.14.

Leibniz and Sleigh on Substantial Unity 67
7. The material just summarized is discussed at greater length in chap. 5 of Mercer 2001. The
other material of this section is new.
8. Bk. 3, chap. 2; Ficino 1559: 43r–43v. There is a translation of some of this material by Luc Deitz
in Kraye 1997: 30–36. It is interesting that the verb used by Ficino to describe the relation between the
soul and the body, namely, diffundere, is the same one used by the young Leibniz in his account of the
relation between the active and passive principles in a corporeal substance. For more, see hereafter.
A longer version of this essay included a more thorough discussion of the interesting views of Ficino.
A discussion of the relation between Ficino’s and Leibniz’s views on unity will appear in an essay
tentatively entitled ‘‘The Power of Unity: Leibniz and His Predecessors.’’
9. For some of Plotinus’s comments on emanative causation, see Plotinus 1990: 5.1.6.37–39;
4.3.10.32–42; 5.5.9.1–10; 2.3.18. For some of Proclus’s comments, see Proclus 1963: props. 18, 26.
10. For more details about Leibniz’s eclectic tendencies and his commitment to the philosophy of
Aristotle, see Mercer 2001: chaps. 1–3.
11. A 6.1:91. The belief that some bones are ‘‘deathless’’ is mentioned by Plato in Phaedo 80d.
12. Between roughly mid-1670 and 1672, Leibniz considered the mind-like active principles in
nonhuman substances to be momentary minds which produced themselves constantly ‘‘by traduction.’’
In this case, each active principle was constituted of a series of momentary minds. For more on this, and
reference to other literature, see Mercer 2001: chap. 4.
13. A 6.2:287–288. See also A 6.2:490; A 6.1:285–286, 495–496; A 2.1:97, 113.
14. For a fuller account of the emanative relation between God and the created world, see Mercer
2001: chap. 5, secs. 4–5; chap. 6, secs. 1, 3; chap. 9; chap. 10, sec. 3.
15. A 6.1:490/L 110. Leibniz’s argument here, in the Confession of Nature against the Atheists, is a
bit more complicated that I am suggesting; and he has not characterized the position of mechanists like
Gassendi and Descartes with complete accuracy. For more details about these and related matters, see
Mercer 2001: 70–82.
16. The Latin in the latter part of this passage reads: ‘‘Porro Mens creata . . . non unitur omni
corpori, sed ei tantum in quo radicata est, et a quo separari non potest. V.g. in Corpore humano non
putandum est animam omnibus quae in eo sunt corpusculis hypostatice uniri, cum perpetuo transpirent, sed in ipso centro cerebri ﬂori cuidam substantiae ﬁxo et inseparabili, subtilissime mobili in
spirituum animalium centro inhaeret et substantialiter unitur ita ut nec morte separetur’’ (A 6.1:533).
17. Notwithstanding the fact that minds are instruments of God, Leibniz insists that minds (at least
human minds) are ‘‘free.’’ See A 6.1:533.
18. A 6.1:534. I have substituted lower-case letters for the numerals Leibniz uses in this passage in
order to distinguish the claims he makes from the ones I have listed earlier.
19. A 6.1:534–535. For a more thorough account of some of the details of this essay, see Mercer
2001: chap. 4, sec. 3.
20. Also see, e.g., A 6.2:283. When minds act on their bodies, they also produce other things, like
the organization of the body.
21. I argue elsewhere that On the Incarnation of God and related texts provide strong evidence for
the conclusion that by 1671 Leibniz was prepared to construct the passive principle in nature out of
mind-like substances. In brief, my argument is that otherwise these essays imply that matter is involved
in thinking. For a discussion of this point, see Mercer 2001: 283–284.
22. See, e.g., A 6.1:285–6; A 2.1:97.
23. A 2.1:113. I am speaking roughly here because the theory of preestablished harmony complicates
things enormously. As I argue elsewhere, the diffusion relation between the active principle or mind-like
form F in a substance S and the passive principle P of S is one of preestablished harmony. That is,
although F and P do not causally interact, P acts in perfect coordination with the thoughts (and instructions) of F. For more on this, see Mercer 2001: 334–340, 364–373, 376–381, 407–409, 411–43, 442–443.
24. In the development of his metaphysics, Leibniz was concerned to construct a theory of
substance that would be consistent with the theological doctrines of resurrection and the Eucharist. See
Mercer 2001: chap. 2; chap. 8, sec. 2.
25. At the end of his discussion of substantial unity, Sleigh poses a question: because Leibniz
sometimes writes as though it were a matter of convention as to whether or not ‘‘an ontology of persisting
substances’’ is better than ‘‘an ontology of transitory individuals,’’ Sleigh asks: ‘‘Did Leibniz take the

68 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
scheme of transitory individuals to be metaphysically impossible, or did he have other grounds for
favoring the scheme of created substances persisting through changes?’’ Although Sleigh suspects that
Leibniz had certain theological concerns that inclined him to prefer persisting substances (e.g., that
moral agency had to persist), he concludes that a clear answer to the question is not forthcoming (Sleigh
1990: 133). The material that I offer here suggests that Leibniz had several reasons, many of which were
theological, for the preference of persisting substances.
26. A more thoroughgoing study of the early writings suggests that Leibniz worked out the details
of his philosophy much earlier than previous scholars have thought. See Mercer 2001.

3

Leibniz on Precise Shapes
and the Corporeal World
SAMUEL LEVEY

n many of his ‘‘middle-years’’ writings, especially those around 1679–89, Leibniz

I advances a rather puzzling argument for the claim that there are no precise

shapes in things, and suggests that shape, motion, and extension are not in things
outside us but involve something imaginary (see A 6.4:1465, 1612–3, 1622). He often
concludes that if there were nothing but shape, motion, and extension in them,
bodies would be only phenomena ‘‘like rainbows and mock suns’’ (A 6.4:1648; see
A 6.4:1464). Such claims about the status of extension and its modes certainly
amount to a rejection of the Cartesian theory of corporeal substance. One might
also suspect that they amount to a rejection of the very idea of corporeal being tout
court.1 Leibniz’s denial of the existence of precise shapes in things has sometimes
been taken to imply an antirealist or idealist reading of his own views about the
nature of body during this same period, and thus to imply an idealist reading of his
view of the corporeal world in general. I think this is a misunderstanding of
Leibniz’s philosophy concerning the status of shape, however, and that the argument for an idealist reading of his metaphysics that relies on it is unsound. A
correct understanding of the content of Leibniz’s views about shape can be recovered by considering their philosophical origins in his writings of the second half
of the 1670s, and with that understanding in mind the dispute between realist and
idealist interpretations of the middle-years metaphysics of the corporeal world can
be properly framed.

Prelude to the Critique of Precise Shapes: Leibniz on Motion
Leibniz’s critique of the Cartesian modes of extension, and in particular his critique of precise shapes, appears at least in outline in many texts from the 1680s. In
the document Specimen of Discoveries of the Admirable Secrets of Nature in
General, tentatively dated to 1688 by the Akademie editors,2 one ﬁnds the following
synopsis:
69

70 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
Indeed, even though this may seem paradoxical, it must be realized that the notion
of extension is not as transparent as is commonly believed. For from the fact that no
body is so very small that it is not actually divided into parts excited by different
motions, it follows that no determinate shape can be assigned to any body, nor is an
exactly [exactum] straight line, or circle, or any other assignable shape of any body,
found in the nature of things, although certain rules are observed by nature even in
its deviation from an inﬁnite series. Thus shape involves something imaginary, and
no other sword can sever the knots that we tie for ourselves by a poor understanding
of the composition of the continuum. (A 6.4:1622)3

Nearly all the characteristic elements of the critique of precise shapes are in play
already in that passage: the ‘‘paradoxical’’ nature of Leibniz’s thesis about the
Cartesian notion of extension; the actually inﬁnite division of matter by motion;
the lack of ‘‘exact’’ and ‘‘assignable’’ shapes in the nature of things; the adherence
of nature to ‘‘certain rules’’; the point that ‘‘shape involves something imaginary’’;
and the reference to the composition of the continuum as the source of the
difﬁculties. There are a few additional elements of his attack on the Cartesian
philosophy that often surface with his discussion of shape. First, Leibniz typically
accompanies his remarks about precise shapes with a summary of his critique of
motion; second, he often explicitly ranks shape (and motion) alongside ‘‘sensible
qualities’’ such as color, heat, sound, and so on. Then, of course, there is the general
conclusion of Leibniz’s argument concerning the nature of body: that its essence
consists not in extension and its modes, as the Cartesians would have it, but in active
and passive forces. All those points Specimen of Discoveries delivers as well, for
Leibniz continues:
The same thing should be said about motion, since, like place, motion too consists
only in a relation, as Descartes correctly recognized. Nor is there any way of
determining precisely how much absolute motion should be assigned to each
subject. But motive force or the power of acting is something real, and can be
discerned in bodies. Thus the essence of body must be located not in extension and
its modiﬁcations, namely shape and motion—which involve something imaginary
no less than heat and color and other sensible qualities—but solely in the force of
acting and resisting, which we perceive not by the imagination but by the intellect.
(A 6.4:1622)

There is perhaps no better single vantage point over Leibniz’s critique of precise
shapes than this summary in Specimen of Discoveries. Still, the lines of argument
driving the critique are left mostly unarticulated here; indeed, it is also characteristic of Leibniz’s remarks, in the 1680s, about the Cartesian modes of extension
for his discussion to proceed in a didactic tone, as though the demonstrations of his
claims have long since been completed. This turns out to be true of the philosophy
itself, for the main lines of Leibniz’s critique of the Cartesian theory of corporeal
substance were in place before the close of the 1670s; references to it in his later
writings tend to advertise the results without disclosing the methodology. For the
moment, however, I mean only to have taken note of what the central points of that
critique are; they will be considered in more detail hereafter.
This essay is primarily concerned to address Leibniz’s critique of precise
shapes, yet some discussion of his critique of motion will be in order ﬁrst. For a

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 71

number of points from his critique of motion are routinely interwoven in the main
texts to be discussed, and one strand of Leibniz’s thought about motion offers a
nice parallel to his discussion of precise shapes and can serve as something of a
prelude to it.
In a dialogue on the ﬁrst philosophy of motion, Pacidius Philalethi, written in
late 1676, Leibniz offers up for scrutiny the following analysis of motion:
I believe motion to be change of place, and I say that motion is in that body which
changes place. (A 6.3:534)

The simple deﬁnition of motion as ‘‘change of place’’ in the ﬁrst clause of the
analysis is taken from Aristotle (see Physics 3.201a7–15), and it remains intact
throughout the dialogue’s inquiry and indeed through the rest of Leibniz’s career.4
Although the metaphysical account of the nature of change of place that is to
be articulated in the Pacidius is quite radical,5 Leibniz evidently takes the simple
deﬁnition to be straightforwardly true, perhaps even a truism about motion. The
second clause of the analysis, according to which ‘‘motion is in the body which
changes place,’’ will eventually prove more problematic, as Leibniz will discover a
difﬁculty for assigning change of place uniquely to individual bodies. But in the
Pacidius the question whether change of place is itself absolute or only relative to
something else is never raised (Leibniz confesses as much in an appended note: see
A 6.3:529); so too the dialogue is silent about whether the attribution of motion or
change of place to a body is the attribution of an absolute intrinsic property to it or
only a relational one. It is a few months later, in February 1677, that Leibniz
announces his view that motion is a ‘‘relative entity,’’ in a document now titled
Motion Is Something Relative.6 There he also offers a look at the argument:
A wonderful fact: motion is something relative, and we cannot distinguish just
which of the bodies is moving. Therefore if it is an affection, its subject will not be
any one body, but the whole world. Hence, it is necessary that all its effects are also
relative. The absolute motion we imagine to ourselves, on the other hand, is
nothing but an affection of our soul while we regard ourselves or other things as
immobile, since we are able to understand the whole thing more easily when these
things are regarded as immobile. (A 6.4:1970)

On Leibniz’s account we imagine certain bodies that are changing place to display
an absolute property of motion. But that appearance of absolute motion in fact
results from our automatic tendency to regard ourselves or other things as being at
rest while change of place occurs. Yet since any given body can equally be taken to
be moving or at rest, it follows that ‘‘we cannot distinguish just which of the bodies
is moving’’ if one or more of them is supposed to be moving absolutely.7 That
equivalence of hypotheses yields the difﬁculty that Leibniz discovers for assigning
motion to an individual body, and it poses a problem for the earlier claim from the
Pacidius that ‘‘motion is in that body which changes place.’’ Once we withhold the
(subjective) choice of a particular frame of reference that the imagination would
ordinarily impose upon our experience, we are left only with the observation that x
is changing place with respect to y. And this fact by itself will not imply that x is
moving; nor will it imply that y is moving; nor that both move.

72 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Leibniz’s argument from the equivalence of hypotheses shows that no unique
assignment of motion and rest to particular bodies in the system can be determined
from change of place. This is a narrowly circumscribed result concerning what we
might call the epistemology of motion. It does refute a naive absolutist conception
of motion according to which observed change of place actually reveals, or even
could reveal, just which body is a subject of absolute motion. But it does not imply
that there is no such thing as motion (for the equivalence-of-hypotheses argument
is not challenging the occurrence of change of place). Nor does it imply that there
can be no absolute distinction between motion and rest among bodies that are
changing place relative to one another. Indeed, despite the equivalence of hypotheses, Leibniz’s own account of motion postulates an intrinsic property of
individual bodies that institutes an absolute distinction between those that move
and those that are at rest. In Motion Is Something Relative, he writes:
It should be noted, however, that when we consider motion not in itself formally,
but with respect to cause, it can be attributed to the body by whose change it
occurs. (A 6.4:1970)

The change in a body by virtue of which change of place occurs is not something
we can distinguish, and so our naive (imagined) assignment of absolute motion to
individual bodies is in itself unfounded and can at best be only accidently correlated with the underlying facts. Nonetheless, the cause of motion is an absolute
and intrinsic property belonging to individual bodies. The revised conception of
motion that Leibniz offers in the wake of his equivalence-of-hypotheses argument
thus remains, in a critical respect, an absolutist one. Though motion considered
‘‘in itself formally’’—that is, as change of place of things within a system of
bodies—has only the status of a relative entity, the property by virtue of which
change of place occurs is an absolute feature of individual bodies; and motion is to
be attributed to the body whose intrinsic change causes the occurrence of change
of place within a system of bodies. This appeal to the cause of motion becomes
Leibniz’s standard line on the analysis of motion. A few years later he makes the
same proposal:
When two bodies approach each other, it can only be decided from the cause of
motion, not the motion itself, which of the two is at rest or moves, or whether both
are moving. It is the same with several bodies. (A 6.4:1400)

Although motion as it appears to us—as an ‘‘absolute’’ change of place—involves
something imaginary; although the relational fact of change of place alone determines no unique assignment of motion and rest; nonetheless, there exists a real
property that belongs absolutely to individual bodies, explains one body’s moving
relative to another, and in fact sets apart those bodies that are truly undergoing a
change, or are in ‘‘true motion,’’8 from those that are at rest. Objections can be
raised against this proposal of Leibniz;9 but for my purposes the point to be taken
here is simply that this is a feature of Leibniz’s account of motion. The appearance
to us of absolute motion is only something we imagine; yet the reality behind the
appearances contains an absolute distinction between motion and rest. Leibniz
further maintains that the underlying causal feature that explains the occurrence of

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 73

relative motion is the very quantity that is conserved in collisions, a conservation
which, he holds, ‘‘must be asserted of the action, i.e. relative motion, by which one
body is related to another or acts on another’’ (April 1676; A 6.3:493). Thus the
particular quantity that is conserved is quantity of ‘‘action,’’ or as Leibniz will often
say, ‘‘power’’ or ‘‘force’’10 (which in January 167811 Leibniz will identify as the
quantity f ¼ mv2), and this belongs to individual bodies as an absolute, intrinsic
feature and not merely as something we imagine to be in bodies.
Thus Leibniz has a two-sided view of motion. As it appears to us, motion has to
be understood to involve something imaginary; as it is behind the appearances,
relational change of place is caused by absolute changes that are intrinsic to the
bodies themselves and constitute ‘‘true motion.’’ And the account reductively
identiﬁes that true motion with force. This will prove to be Leibniz’s longstanding
view of the nature of motion, readily found in texts of the 1680s (see A 6.4:1465, 1559);
a 1694 letter to Huygens offers a good example as well:
As for the difference between absolute and relative motion, I believe that if motion, or better motive force of bodies, is something real, as it seems that one must
recognize, it is necessary that it should have a subject. For if a and b move near to
one another, I confess that all the phenomena would be all the same, no matter
which one is assumed to possess motion or rest; and even if there were 1000 bodies,
I still hold that the phenomena could not furnish us (or even the angels) an
infallible basis for determining the subject or the degree of motion, and that each
can be conceived separately as being at rest; and it is also all that I believe that you
demand of me. But you will not deny (I believe) that in truth each has a certain
degree of motion, or if you will, of force, in spite of the equivalence of hypotheses.
It is true I draw from it this consequence, that there is in nature something besides
what Geometry can determine in it. (GM 2:184)

This two-sided view of motion will also prove to be very suggestive in understanding Leibniz’s critique of precise shapes. For in that case as well, his account
will uphold some claim of reality for bodily forms behind the appearance of
precise shapes while also writing off some of what appears to us as due to the
imagination. And Leibniz will likewise suggest a parallel reduction of shape to
force. Or so, at any rate, I shall argue. With this brief sketch of the critique of
motion now in place,12 it is time to consider Leibniz’s account of precise shapes.

Precise Shapes and the Composition of the Continuum
In article 12 of the Discourse on Metaphysics (1686), Leibniz launches an assault on
the foundations of the Cartesian metaphysics of body. Descartes had deﬁned body
exclusively in terms of extension, seeking to put the theory of corporeal substance
on the sound conceptual footing of geometry and thereby to free it from the
Scholastic detritus of the concepts of form and matter. On the new Cartesian
approach, the whole nature or essence of body was claimed to be nothing more
than extension and its modes, that is, size, shape and motion (see AT 8A:25, 30–
31).13 While this approach was widely criticized for failing to account completely
for the physics of bodies14—having no explanation of antitypy, for example, or

74 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

inertia—it fell to Leibniz alone to suggest that, far from being the ‘‘whole essence’’
of body, the Cartesian notion of extension could not even be absolutely true of
corporeal beings in the ﬁrst place. The reason for this, Leibniz holds, is that
extension and its modes involve something imaginary. Here is article 12:
12. That the notions involved in extension contain something imaginary and cannot
constitute the substance of body. But, to resume the thread of our discussion,
I believe that anyone who will meditate about the nature of substance, as I have
explained it above, will ﬁnd either that bodies are not substances in metaphysical
rigor (which was in fact the view of the Platonists) or that the nature of body does not
consist merely in extension, that is, in size, shape, and motion, but that we must
necessarily recognize in body something related to souls, something we commonly
call substantial form, even though it makes no change in the phenomena, any
more than do the souls of animals, if they have any. It is even possible to demonstrate that the notions of size, shape, and motion are not as distinct as is imagined
and that they contain something imaginary and relative to our perception, as do
(though to a greater extent) color, heat, and other similar qualities, qualities about
which one can doubt whether they are truly found in the nature of things outside
ourselves. That is why qualities of this kind cannot constitute any substance. And if
there were no other principle of identity in body other than the one just mentioned,
a body could not subsist for more than a moment. (A 6.4:1545)

Leibniz’s attitude toward size, shape and motion is exposed more fully in the latter
half of the passage: not only does the nature of body not consist ‘‘merely’’ in
extension, but also the modes of extension themselves—or more precisely, as he
puts it in this case, the notions of those modes—‘‘contain something imaginary and
relative to our perception.’’ The modes of extension are to be ranked with the
sensible qualities and thus are not of the right kind to constitute any substance
in the ﬁrst place. Once again the argument for ranking size, shape, and motion
with the sensible qualities is not presented, and one is left only with Leibniz’s
assurance that it is ‘‘possible to demonstrate’’ this.
Even in his very early writings on physics (c. 1671), Leibniz already suggests that
the ﬁgures of geometry are never to be found exactly in nature (see A 6.2:255, 269),
where this claim seems to express the modest sentiment that the descriptions of
nature worked with in mathematics are only idealizations of its actual structure.
(Realism about the corporeal world is clearly not under discussion in those passages.) But the reported ‘‘demonstrations’’ concerning precise shapes come in
somewhat later writings and are something of a very different order from the
modest sentiment. And in fact Leibniz appears to have two ways of demonstrating
that precise shapes involve something imaginary, one based on an account of the
structure of change that individual bodies undergo across time, and the other based
on an account of the division of individual bodies into parts.15 The argument
from the structure of change seems to have been advanced only once, in a 1686
document, There Is No Perfect Shape At All in Bodies (A 6.4:1613), though its
elements are all derived from Leibniz’s earlier writings on the continuum. The
argument from the division of bodies into parts also arises from Leibniz’s work on
the nature of the continuum, but by contrast with the argument from change, it is
advertised repeatedly across the texts of the 1680s. The argument from change is

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 75

not for that reason any less important—indeed, it may well be far the more radical
of the two—but having commented on it elsewhere,16 I shall concentrate here only
on the argument from the division of bodies.
Leibniz follows Descartes in supposing the material universe to be a plenum
and in holding that intraplenary motion demands the actual division of bodies into
parts. In particular, Leibniz endorses Descartes’ demonstration from Principles of
Philosophy 2.33–35 that the special case of the circulation of matter through unequal
spaces in the plenum requires an inﬁnite division of matter into parts—a demonstration that Leibniz praises as ‘‘most beautiful and worthy of his genius’’ (G
4:370).17 The hypothesis of inﬁnite division then presents a puzzle about how to
understand the structure of matter, since this inﬁnite division holds not only of the
inﬁnite universe in the whole but also of any ﬁnite part of it. Yet by late 1676 Leibniz
is convinced that no part of matter—and indeed, no interval of space, time or
motion, nor in general any continuum—could be composed out of points (‘‘minima’’), on pain of the paradoxes that arise concerning the inﬁnite and the continuum (A 6.3:549). (Nor does he allow that matter could be made up of an inﬁnity of
inﬁnitesimal quantities, since he ﬁnds inﬁnitesimals to be only ‘‘ﬁctions’’ of his
calculus and not something that could truly exist in nature.) Thus the ‘‘continuum’’
of matter cannot be properly understood as an undivided uniform whole like a
geometrical line, since this would preclude the possibility of motion; nor can it be
taken to resolve into a discrete succession of points as if it were just so many grains of
sand. The true account of the continuum as it exists in nature has ﬁnally to reconcile
the discrete and the continuous; but it is unclear how this could be possible.
Leibniz solves this puzzle by ascribing to matter an inﬁnitary scaling structure of
divisions into ‘‘parts within parts,’’ in which every part of matter is further subdivided
into ﬁner parts, and so on ad inﬁnitum, but in which there is no ﬁnest division into
parts and thus no ultimate resolution of the continuum into points. Although there
are always inﬁnitely many divisions within any part of matter—and inﬁnitely many
points actually assigned in any interval of space, time or motion—the parts are
always ﬁnite and the points of division remain ‘‘extrema’’ or endpoints of the extended parts and are not independent parts of things in their own right.18 This new
conception of the structure of the continuum is unveiled in a passage—and what
discussion of the continuum could be complete without it?—in Pacidius Philalethi:
Accordingly the division of the continuum must not be considered to be like the
division of sand into grains, but like that of a sheet of paper or tunic into folds. And
so although there occur some folds smaller than others inﬁnite in number, a body
is never thereby dissolved into points or minima. . . . It is just as if we suppose a
tunic to be scored with folds multiplied to inﬁnity in such a way that there is no
fold so small that it is not subdivided by a new fold. . . . And the tunic cannot be
said to be resolved all the way down into points; instead, although some folds are
smaller than others to inﬁnity, bodies are always extended and points never become parts, but always remain mere extrema. (A 6.3:555)

In Leibniz’s view, the key to this new account of the continuum is to understand
that the continuum is nowhere uniform in its structure (see A 6.3:547, 563). He
articulates the basic idea in a statement speciﬁcally about motion:

76 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
[T]he motion of a moving thing is actually divided into an inﬁnity of other
motions, each different from the other, and does not persist the same and uniform
through any stretch. (A 6.3:564)

Thus an interval of motion is always composed of submotions and not of points,
but those submotions are themselves nowhere undivided and uniform wholes;
rather, every part of motion is always further variegated by submotions—‘‘no
motion stays the same through any space or time however small’’ (A 6.3:565)—and
so there is always further complexity to be found within motion upon every scale.
The account is not restricted to motion of course. Leibniz takes there to be a
‘‘harmony of matter, time and motion,’’ in which ‘‘there is no portion of matter
which is not actually divided into further parts, so that there is no body so small
that there is not a world of inﬁnitary creatures in it’’ (A 6.3:566). But still ‘‘this does
not mean either that a body or space is divided into points, or time into moments,
because indivisibles are not parts, but the endpoints of parts; which is why, even
though everything is subdivided, it is still not resolved all the way down into
minima’’ (A 6.3:566). Just as is true for motion, no part of matter is the same and
uniform throughout, but rather every part is broken up into still ﬁner pieces, each
different from the others, and so on ad inﬁnitum.
The new conception of the continuum, I believe, plays a leading role in
Leibniz’s critique of precise shapes. In particular, the point that no motion and no
part of matter stays ‘‘the same and uniform through any stretch’’ has immediate
implications for shape. In nature there will be no part of any body whose shape can
be perfectly described by straight lines or even by ‘‘smooth’’ curves. Since every
part of matter is in fact inﬁnitely broken up into separate parts each of which is
moving with its own individual motion, to describe a given part of matter as having
a shape constructible from straight lines or smooth curves is necessarily to neglect
the variegation of the ﬁner parts, and thus to neglect inﬁnitely many details of its
actual structure. Take as a simpliﬁed case of a body a ﬁnite line segment. On
Leibniz’s account, this line segment cannot be exactly straight; rather it is divided
by motion into many distinct subsegments—folded, as it were, into many smaller
pieces, each of which is turned in a slightly different direction from its neighbors.
Adjacent pieces of the line are strictly discontinuous from one another and only
contiguous (see A 6.3:537), for the points at which they ‘‘touch’’ are in fact points
of discontinuity and preserve the continuum only in the sense that no empty space
can be assigned in between the touching endpoints (see A 6.3:546). Those points
of discontinuity in the line (or singularities in the function) will preclude the line as
a whole from forming a smooth curve, for lines containing such points could be at
best ‘‘piecewise’’ smooth curves. But the smaller pieces of the line cannot be perfectly described by straight lines or smooth curves any more than could the original,
for each of them is likewise further divided into smaller folds, and so on ad inﬁnitum. Yet now it appears that no shape could perfectly describe the structure of
the ‘‘folded line,’’ since by the lights of traditional geometry, all the shapes there are
are deﬁnable only by reference to straight lines or smooth curves.
The scaling structure of folds within folds that Leibniz holds to be instantiated
throughout nature is recognizable, from a contemporary perspective, as a fractal

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 77

structure—or at least as a natural prototype to the fractals of later mathematics.19
Taking the image of the folded tunic in the most straightforward way, it will indeed
be impossible to assign any traditional geometrical shape to it, since every such
shape necessarily is ﬁnitely constructible from smooth curves or straight lines. The
Leibnizian tunic and the simpliﬁed case of the folded line are structures that might
be approximated by inﬁnite series of geometrical ﬁgures of increasing complexity,
but every shape of the sort that can be rigorously deﬁned in traditional geometry
must fail to describe the tunic or the folded line exactly—and fail to do so at
inﬁnitely many different points. Thus the structure of the corporeal world envisaged by Leibniz’s metaphysics in 1676 simply outstrips the early modern limits of
precise mathematical or geometrical description. And indeed the technical resources necessary to offer mathematically precise descriptions of fractal structures
will not be suitably developed for nearly another three hundred years.
Leibniz’s new vision of the continuum will have to be tempered by a second
strand in his thought about the mathematical structure of things, however. If his
fractal account introduces complexity at every scale of inspection in a way that
prevents any actual body from having a precise shape of the sort deﬁnable in early
modern mathematics, he yet also insists that no assignable error will arise from the
use of that mathematics to describe the properties of actual bodies. Leibnizian
bodies are supposed at once to possess fractal complexity on all scales and to
converge on being mathematically continuous objects. It is as if, seen from the
inside, the structure of these bodies displays a scaling array of inﬁnite complexity,
while seen from the outside their structure approximates to continuity—as if the
discontinuity of the fractal somehow approaches the continuity of a traditional
precise shape with arbitrary closeness without ever actually achieving it. It is far
from clear that the ‘‘fractal’’ idea can be reconciled with the ‘‘convergence toward
continuity’’ idea (in contemporary fractal mathematics, those two ideas are normally set in contrast to one another in order to help convey the radically discontinuous nature of fractal objects). But it is perfectly clear that Leibniz means to
have it both ways. In a revealing passage from De Organo Sive Arte Magna Cogitandi (c. 1679), Leibniz writes:
Even if no straight lines or circles can exist [dari possent] in nature, it is nonetheless sufﬁcient that shapes can exist [dari posse] that differ from straight lines and
circles so little that the error is less than any given error—which is sufﬁcient in
order to demonstrate certainty as well as usage. (A 6.4:159)

The straight line and the circle are, for obvious reasons, Leibniz’s stock examples
of precise shapes, and this is one of the earliest texts of which I am aware that
records Leibniz using the language and phrasing that will be so characteristic of
the critique of precise shapes in the texts of the 1680s. By contrast, the phrase ‘‘the
error is less than any given error’’ is already a well-oiled component of his discussions of the calculus and its application to physical phenomena.20 The close
presence of the two in this passage suggests that by 1679 Leibniz has seen through
to at least some of the consequences of his fractal account, in particular to the
consequence that no precise shapes can exist in nature. And he may well be
worrying about the potential difﬁculty that a fractal theory of body will pose to a

78 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

philosophy that aims to uphold an account of nature as fully mathematizable—
hence the (unargued) insistence that the shapes that can exist in nature will always
differ ‘‘so little that the error is less than any given error’’ from the exactly mathematically deﬁnable shapes of straight lines and circles that cannot.
A last element to observe in Leibniz’s early thought about the division of
matter involves the link between the abstract considerations about the continuum
and the more concrete topic of impulse dynamics. The hypothesis of the plenum
ﬁts naturally with the idea that motion produced in any one place will be transmitted throughout the universe, and thus that every disturbance will have effects
on all bodies. Since on Leibniz’s early view the division of matter is due to
differences in motion within the plenum, the hypothesis of an inﬁnite division of
matter aligns in an intuitive way with the idea that the universe is an inﬁnite
assemblage of distinct bodies each moving with its own motion, for each such
motion will then have some effect, however subtle, on every other body. From the
point of view of any single body, there will be an inﬁnite fusillade of impulses
coming in from every side and transmitting to it effects from all the distinct
motions arising in every corner of the world. Thus the motion of any single body
will be constantly agitated by the motions of its neighbors and indeed by the
motions of all the other bodies in the universe. Leibniz is quick to see the connection between the division of the continuum and the continual action of an
inﬁnity of bodies upon one another. The nonuniformity of motion in every interval
that is postulated to solve the kinematical puzzles concerning the structure of the
continuum has as its natural dynamical correlate the idea that accelerative forces
are acting on bodies in every interval of space and time (‘nonuniform motion’ is
also standard language for accelerated motion), and Leibniz writes in the Pacidius
that the hypothesis of the nonuniformity of the continuum ‘‘is also consistent with
reason, for there is no body which is not acted upon by those around it at every
single moment’’ (A 6.3:565). This idea will become quite prominent in his later
discussions of shape as well.

Imagination and the Manifest Image of Nature
Leibniz’s 1676 inquiry into the composition of the continuum provides a central
line of argument for his later critique of precise shapes—truth in advertising for
Leibniz. A second line of argument that appears in the critique of precise shapes
also emerges during this early period. Leibniz repeatedly asserts precise shapes to
involve something ‘‘imaginary,’’ and in writings composed around the same time as
his dialogue on the continuum, one ﬁnds some very illuminating comments about
the role of the imagination in constructing perceptual experience and about what
Leibniz calls imaginary notions. Most signiﬁcant in this connection is a document
written in April 1676, about seven months before the Pacidius, and titled On
Inﬁnite Numbers.
Among the several topics under discussion in On Inﬁnite Numbers is the nature
of the limit entities postulated by Leibniz’s mathematics. In his calculus, curves are
represented as sections of inﬁnitary polygons, so that a circle, for example, would

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 79

be represented as a regular polygon with inﬁnitely many inﬁnitesimal sides. Successive approximations of a circle by a series of ﬁnite polygons of increasing
numbers of sides appear to tend toward a ‘‘limit polygon’’ with inﬁnitely many sides,
which is identiﬁed with the circle itself. Yet by the time he composes On Inﬁnite
Numbers Leibniz has already ruled that inﬁnitesimals are only ﬁctions and not real
quantities of any kind, and thus inﬁnitary limit polygons will at best be ﬁctions also.
The question before Leibniz at this point is how to understand the role of these limit
entities and the propositions of his inﬁnitary mathematics.
As he explores the issue Leibniz is careful to disavow any direct commitment
to inﬁnitary limit entities, and he suggests that his limit-analysis methods can be
interpreted as shorthand for the classical ‘‘method of exhaustion’’ developed by
Archimedes.21 Such suggestions will come to characterize one line of defense for
the foundations of the calculus. What is especially striking in this document for my
purposes, however, is the discussion Leibniz offers of the role of the imagination in
mathematical reasoning:
The circle—as a polygon greater than any assignable, as if this were possible—is a
ﬁctive entity, and so are other things of that kind. Accordingly, when something is
said about the circle we understand it to be true of any polygon such that there is
some polygon in which the error is smaller than any assigned amount a, and
another polygon in which the error is smaller than any other deﬁnite assigned
amount b. However, there will not be a polygon in which this error is smaller than
all assignable amounts a and b at the same time, even if it can be said that
polygons somehow approach such an entity in order. And so if certain polygons
are able to increase according to some law, and something is true of them the
more they increase, our mind imagines some ultimate polygon; and whatever it
sees becoming more and more so in each single polygon, it declares to be perfectly
so in this ultimate one. And even if it did not exist in the nature of things, an
expression for it could nevertheless be produced, for the sake of giving propositions
in abbreviated form. (A 6.3:498)

The mind passes from the series of ﬁnite polygons that increasingly approximate
the properties of a circle to imagine an ‘‘ultimate polygon,’’ though no such limit
entity could actually exist in nature. Leibniz explores this line of thought further:
Even though these entities are ﬁctitious, geometry nevertheless exhibits real truths
which can also be expressed in other ways without them. But these ﬁctitious
entities are excellent forms of abbreviation, and for this reason extremely useful.
For entities of this kind, i.e. polygons whose sides do not appear distinctly, are
made apparent to us by the imagination, whence there arises in us afterwards the
suspicion of an entity having no sides. (A 6.3:499)

There the step is being taken from polygonal ﬁgures to a continuous, uniformly
curving one; the imaginary polygon whose sides ‘‘do not appear distinctly’’ yields to
the ‘‘suspicion’’ of an entity with no sides at all—the circle. But Leibniz will deny
that what the imagination conjures before the mind is an image of a perfect circle;
rather there is only a thought of a uniform and continuous entity:22
Instead, what must be said is that in the mind there is a thought of uniformity, yet
no image of a perfect circle: instead we apply uniformity to this image afterwards,

80 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
a uniformity we forget we have applied after sensing the irregularities. Were we
then conscious at some time that we had sensed them? For consciousness is
necessary for forgetting. But this is not the case. Therefore it must be said, rather,
that when we sense a circle or polygon, we never sense uniformity in it, but neither
do we even sense a nonuniformity, that is to say, we do not remember having
sensed anything nonuniform in it, since the inequality did not immediately strike
us. And because of this memory we now ascribe the name of uniformity to it. It
must be seen whether we might not be conscious for very small intervals of time of
many things we do not remember, or about which we are unable to speak or write,
which we cannot express in characters on account of their extremely small size,
since they would have little relation to such things. But they are not on this
account any less sensed by our consciousness. Rather, we forget about these things,
just as we forget about the things we dream about. (A 6.3:499)

It is not altogether clear whether Leibniz is talking about mathematical reasoning
and images in the mind of polygons whose irregularities are gradually forgotten
and replaced by the thought of uniformity, or whether he means to be discussing
sensory perception and the shapes of things in the external world. Indeed, he
appears to be slipping from the one to the other. I believe the doctrine of the role of
the imagination that he is offering is in fact meant to cover both cases; at any rate,
the point of his discussion can be made out either way. What we take to be
uniformity of shape is an appearance generated by a two-stage activity of the mind:
the ‘‘irregularities’’ or ‘‘inequalities’’ of the shapes actually presented to the mind
are neglected or forgotten, and then the idea of uniformity is applied to ﬁll out the
thought of the object. Thus the imagination plasters over much of the ﬁne
structure of the objects under consideration—indeed, inﬁnitely many details—to
produce a cognitive appearance of uniformity. Still, the irregularities of the objects
exist and are even ‘‘sensed by our consciousness,’’ but only so subtly or ﬂeetingly
that they fail to be retained in consciousness long enough to be manifest in our
experience of things. Where memory fails, imagination takes up the slack.
Leibniz’s account of the continuum from the Pacidius combines with his
remarks on the imagination from On Inﬁnite Numbers to suggest an intriguing
picture of the relation between mind and world. Sense perception presents to the
subject of experience the appearance of a world of precise shapes; the manifest
image (to borrow Sellars’s term) of corporeal reality is thus very much a Cartesian
image of geometrically precise bodies. But the scientiﬁc image, itself only ﬂeetingly
sensed in consciousness, is of an inﬁnitely more complex world. Corporeal reality
behind the appearances is an inﬁnitely divided fractal world, and it is only the
activity of the mind, and of the imagination in particular, that smoothes over its
rough edges and presents the world in experience as if it were a Cartesian geometrically uniform one. Of course closer inspection, say perception aided by microscopes, might bring to light more of the underlying irregularities in things; but at
any given scale of inspection, ‘‘most’’ of the inﬁnitely many details of the division of
matter will fall below the threshold of sustained conscious experience. The precise
shapes that appear in experience are thus imaginary, or at least involve something
imaginary, insofar as the uniformity they appear to contain is not actually present in
the things in nature but is the result of the activity of the imagination.

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 81

Still more insight into Leibniz’s thought comes in a 1678 piece, Chrysippus’
Heap, where he explicitly deﬁnes imaginary notions as follows:
I call those notions imaginary which are not in the things outside us, but whose
essence it is to appear to us. (A 6.4:70)23

This point about its being of the essence of imaginary notions to appear to us is
carried forward into later writings, and Leibniz’s view of the manifest image can be
observed in connection with it in a passage about sense perception from the New
Essays (1704):
[W]hen the swift rotation of a cog-wheel makes us perceive an artiﬁcial transparency, as I have noticed on visits to clock-makers, we are not able to discern the
idea of the cause of this, i.e. the idea of the teeth on the wheel. The wheel’s
rotation makes the teeth disappear and an imaginary continuous transparent [ring]
appear in their place; it is made up of successive appearances of teeth and of gaps
between them, but in such rapid succession that our imagination cannot distinguish them. So the teeth are encountered in the distinct notion of this transparency, but not in that confused sensory perception of it. It is the latter’s nature to be
confused and to remain so; for if the confusion ceased (e.g. if the motion slowed
down enough for us to be able to observe the parts in succession) it would no
longer be this same perception, i.e. it would no longer be this image of transparency. (A 6.6:403)

It is of the essence of the sensory perception of the rotating cog-wheel that the ﬁner
details, the teeth and the gaps between them, cannot be distinguished. The notion
of this appearance presented by sense perception is that of a continuous transparent ring, but it is only an imaginary notion. Note, however, that Leibniz’s
holding a certain notion involved in the content of experience to be imaginary
does not automatically mean that there is nothing in the world behind the appearances to correspond to the experience. For by contrast with the imaginary
notion of a continuous transparent ring, there is the distinct notion of this transparency, and in it are contained those details of the reality that the appearances
neglect. Presumably this distinct notion of the transparency, like those of the true
nature of motion or shape, is one ‘‘which we perceive not by the imagination but
by the intellect’’ (A 6.4:1622)—by virtue of a proper understanding of underlying
facts.
When in later texts the notions of shape, motion and extension are classiﬁed as
imaginary, or involving something imaginary, those qualities are thereby being
placed in the same category with sensible qualities, including those of color,
sound, and heat, and even those of the illusory quality of transparency that appears
to belong to the moving cog-wheel.24 In almost any context the proposition that the
geometrical qualities of shape, motion, and extension are on a footing with sensible
qualities would be surprising; in the era of Cartesianism, it would strike the reader
as especially hard to believe. This is not lost on Leibniz, whose draft of the April
30, 1687, letter to Arnauld prefaces a few comments on shape and motion with the
warning: ‘‘Perhaps one will have cause to be surprised that I place shape and
motion in the same rank with phenomena.’’ After a summary of his critique of
motion, the draft continues:

82 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
And with respect to shape I uphold another paradox, namely, that there is no
shape exact and real, and that neither sphere, nor parabola, nor other perfect
shape will ever be found in body. . . . One will always ﬁnd inequalities there to
inﬁnity. That comes about because matter is always subdivided to inﬁnity. (Draft
of letter of April 30, 1687; LBr 16, Bl. 81v, quoted in Sleigh 1990: 112)

Leibniz clearly takes a degree of satisfaction in this ‘‘paradox,’’ and perhaps he ﬁnds
some irony in it as well. For the implication of his analysis of precise shapes and
the structure of corporeal reality is that the austere and anti-Scholastic scientiﬁc
image proposed by the Cartesians, far from being a puriﬁed intellectual account of
the world, is itself guilty of mistaking the sensory appearances for reality.
So it is clear that the early writings on the continuum contain the elements
necessary to formulate the idea that the corporeal world is inﬁnitely complex in its
actual structure but nonetheless appears to consist in bodies with mathematically
deﬁnable precise shapes due to the natural limits on sense perception and the
activity of the imagination. It is clear as well in the later writings that those
elements have been woven together in just that way. In a 1705 letter to Sophie,
Leibniz writes:
It is the imperfection and fault of our senses that makes us conceive of physical things as Mathematical Beings, in which there is indeterminacy. It can be
demonstrated that there is no line or shape in nature that gives exactly and keeps
uniformly for the least space and time the properties of a straight or circular line,
or of any other line whose deﬁnition a ﬁnite mind can comprehend. (G 7:563)

And again, with particular clarity, in a letter to Burcher de Volder, around 1704–5:
A spherical body complete in all respects is nowhere in nature; the soul forms such
a notion by concealing aberrations. And it is the same for any other shape that a
ﬁnite mind can grasp, namely, such a shape can never exist exactly. (G 2:277)

Thus the fractal conception of the world and the account of sense perception and
imagination seem to be at work in Leibniz’s thought about the appearance of
precise shapes and the reality behind them both early and late in his career. They
are the foundations upon which he rests his critique of precise shapes.
With Leibniz’s early writings on the continuum and the imagination in mind,
the critiques of motion and of precise shapes can be easily recognized in later
writings as well—writings that have sometimes appeared rather enigmatic otherwise. For instance, in Wonders Concerning the Nature of Corporeal Substance
(c. 1683), Leibniz writes:
Even though extension and motion are more distinctly understood than other
qualities, since all the rest have to be explained using them, it must in fact still be
acknowledged that neither extension nor motion can be understood distinctly by us
at all. This is because on the one hand we are always embroiled in the difﬁculties
concerning the composition of the continuum and the inﬁnite, and on the other,
because there are in fact no precise shapes [certae ﬁgurae] in the nature of things,
and consequently no precise motions [certi motus]. And just as color and sound are
phenomena, rather than true attributes of things containing a certain absolute nature

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 83
without relation to us, so too are extension and motion. For it cannot really be said
just which subject the motion is in. Consequently nothing in motion is real besides
the force and power vested in things. (A 6.4:1465)

Though the critiques of motion and precise shape appear only in summary form
here, the outlines of his earlier views remain evident: from the analysis of the
composition of the continuum and the argument from the equivalence of hypothesis, the Cartesian concepts of extension, shape, and motion can be seen to
contain something imaginary; they are thus to be superseded by a metaphysics of
corporeal beings developed in terms of force or power.
Not all of Leibniz’s presentations of his critique of precise shapes are organized to display the role of the paradoxes of the continuum. The ‘‘merely’’ physical
considerations deriving from the kinematics of intraplenary motion are often allowed to stand on their own, and some of Leibniz’s clearest statements of his view
of precise shapes are given in this mode. A well-known discussion of this sort
occurs in the 1689 piece Primary Truths.25 There Leibniz begins by pointing out
that in the plenum all motions will be transmitted to all bodies at least to some
degree:
In a vessel ﬁlled with liquid—and the whole universe is just such a vessel—motion
made in the middle is propagated to the edges, although it is rendered more and
more insensible, the more it recedes from its origin. (A 6.4:1646–1647)

To sustain all these effects of near and remote motions, it will follow that in the
plenum ‘‘there is no body so small that it is not actually subdivided,’’ and each
particular body ‘‘is acted upon by everything else in the whole universe and
receives some effect from everything’’ (A 6.4:1646–1647). The actions of other bodies
on a given body x are expressed in x by its internal structure of parts and its changes
of shape; these changes consist in its being divided into parts, and thus to express an
inﬁnity of distinct effects impressed upon it by the outer world, the division of x into
parts will likewise be inﬁnitary. The idea that the exposure of a ﬁnite body to the
actions of an inﬁnite plenum of other moving bodies causes that body and all of
its parts to be divided into further parts becomes a staple of Leibniz’s thought by
the mid 1680s (see A 6.4:1613–1614, 1622). In Primary Truths Leibniz presses it into its
far-reaching consequences for the nature of bodily shape:
There is no determinate shape in actual things, for none can be appropriate
[satifacere] for an inﬁnite number of impressions. And so neither a circle, nor an
ellipse, nor any other line we can deﬁne exists except in the intellect, nor do lines
exist before they are drawn nor parts before they are separated off. Extension and
motion, as well as bodies themselves, insofar as only motion and extension are
placed in bodies, are not substances, but true phenomena, like rainbows and mock
suns. For there are no shapes in things. (A 6.4:1648)

Such examples could be further multiplied, but Primary Truths, Wonders, and
passages quoted earlier from Discourse on Metaphysics and Specimen of Discoveries should sufﬁce as evidence of the content of Leibniz’s account in the
middle years.

84 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Shape, Force, and Realism about the Corporeal World
The interpretation of Leibniz’s account of shape developed in this essay has it that
for Leibniz actual bodies are in fact inﬁnitely complex or fractal in structure and
thus not deﬁnable by the precise shapes of traditional geometry. One way to say
this is to say that actual bodies, as they are in themselves, possess fractal shapes of
inﬁnite complexity although they do not possess what Leibniz calls ‘‘precise
shapes.’’ It is thus in accord with this reading of Leibniz to uphold (in Sleigh’s
term) a ‘‘realistic construal’’ of the theory of corporeal substances and aggregates
that is also on display in Leibniz’s writings.
Much of that will be controversial, however, for on some important interpretations of Leibniz’s metaphysics of this period, the critique of precise shapes is
to be understood as falling within the umbrella of an antirealist reading of his
theory of corporeal beings—a reading according to which Leibniz does not really
hold there to be corporeal beings at all (and in particular no corporeal substances,
unities per se). On the antirealist reading Leibniz’s stated theory of corporeal
substances and aggregates is rather to be construed ‘‘idealistically’’ so that, in the
end, it is reduced to a theory countenancing only soul-like incorporeal substances.
The critique of precise shapes has a special place in this line of interpretation since
it is sometimes used as evidence against a realistic construal of his theory of
corporeal beings and so as part of the case for the antirealist or idealist interpretation of Leibniz’s middle-years metaphysics of the corporeal world in general.
The principal idealist readings of the critique of precise shapes have been
advanced by Robert Sleigh, Jr. (1990), and by Robert Adams (1994). Concerning
the positive view arising from the critique of precise shapes, their accounts are
signiﬁcantly the same: Leibniz means to hold that substances simply have no shape
at all and likewise no extension, and this is to be understood as incompatible with a
realistic construal of corporeal substance. Sleigh’s and Adams’s respective discussions of Leibniz’s critique and their criticisms of the sort of account this essay offers
differ in some details, however, and it will be worth considering the two separately.
I shall turn ﬁrst to Adams’s account, and then take up Sleigh’s with its more
extensive attack on the realistic interpretation of Leibniz’s view of shape.
Adams explores Leibniz’s view of precise shapes with the idealist reading of
Leibniz’s metaphysics assumed as a premise, and not primarily with an eye towards
using the issue to argue for that reading (his defense of the idealist interpretation is
given on different grounds). In particular Adams assumes that the view implicit
in Leibniz’s discussion of shape is this: ‘‘Bodies—organic or living bodies in
particular—are appearances of monads’’ (Adams 1994: 230). Monads are of course
the simple incorporeal souls or soul-like substances that Leibniz explicitly postulates in later writings. On this account, bodies are appearances or phenomena by
which we perceive monads, and the body is the expression of the soul or monad. As
Adams sees it, the critique of precise shapes trades on the doctrine of soul-body
expression and the capacity of a single body to express the monad. For according to
Leibniz, the monad itself expresses or ‘‘mirrors’’ the whole universe, and since the
universe is inﬁnitely complex (containing an actual inﬁnity of simple substances),

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 85

a body of only ﬁnite complexity would not be adequate to express the soul or
monad of which it is the appearance. The question is then what to make of
Leibniz’s claim that there are no precise shapes in those bodies.
On Adams’s view, ‘‘The shapes thus excluded from nature are ﬁnitely complex
shapes’’ (1994: 230), and he offers the following suggestion about Leibniz’s view of
bodies:
[A] body conceived as a phenomenon having a certain deﬁnite extension, shape
and motion is not complex enough to be an adequate expression of any real thing,
according to Leibniz. It is not complex enough to express something that expresses
the whole universe as a monad does. It is a mathematical abstraction. Perhaps the
body that expresses a monad is an inﬁnite series of such abstractions, each more
complex than its predecessors. (1994: 230–231)

Adams places more emphasis on the doctrine of mutual expression between body
and soul than I would; though that doctrine is indeed an important feature of
Leibniz’s metaphysics already during the middle years (even apart from the question whether the soul is itself a monad or merely a substantial form of a corporeal
substance), I do not see that it is actually playing a role in Leibniz’s arguments
against the existence of precise shapes in things. At any rate, it would at best ﬁgure
only in the ‘‘physical’’ versions of the argument; the argument from the composition of the continuum simply makes no reference at all to soul-body expression.
And of course the role of the monad eo nomine in the argument is entirely a feature
of its reconstruction along idealist lines, as the relevant texts all predate Leibniz’s
ﬁrst use of the term ‘monad’ in the metaphysics of this period. Still, Adams’s view
that the shapes excluded from nature are ﬁnitely complex shapes and the suggestion that a body, conceived as a phenomenon, might be an inﬁnite series of
increasingly complex abstractions are both congenial to the reading I offer, at least
up to a point.
On the view I recommend of the middle-years metaphysics, there remains a
distinction to be drawn in Leibniz’s philosophy between the phenomenon of
bodily shape as it appears in perception and corporeal reality as it is in itself.26
Perception, due to its natural limits, can provide increasingly exact representations
of corporeal reality through an inﬁnite series of approximations, though at no
single scale of inspection can all of the structure of the corporeal world, or of any
part of it, be fully manifest to us. Still, there is a corporeal world whose structure is
approximated in our sense perception of it. By contrast, Adams’s idealist Leibniz
places nothing corporeal behind the inﬁnite series of phenomena that appear in
perception; rather, corporeal shape is exhausted by these mathematical abstractions. The inﬁnitely complex reality behind all the veils of appearance is simply
incorporeal and in no further respect does it possess any shape at all.
The conclusion that I think Leibniz draws is not that real shapes are inﬁnitely
complex, though some things he says (e.g., in DM 6) might leave us with that
impression. Rather, he concludes that shape as such is only a phenomenon. I
suppose that an inﬁnitely complex shape would involve a line segment of ﬁnite
length that changes not merely its curvature but also the direction of its change
of curvature inﬁnitely many times, and that Leibniz would have thought that

86 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
an absurd and impossible monstrosity. What I assume he would say, instead of
postulating inﬁnitely complex shapes, is that for every ﬁnitely complex shape that
might be ascribed to a body there is another still more complex that more adequately expresses reality. (Adams 1994: 230)

It is indeed Leibniz’s preferred way to characterize the inﬁnite ‘‘syncategorematically,’’ so to speak, by employing the quantiﬁcational form ‘‘for every x there is a
y . . . ’’ (for every p, there is a p . . . ),27 and in one sense Adams may be right about
whether Leibniz would postulate inﬁnitely complex shapes. For even if, as I
suggest, Leibniz ascribes something like fractal structure to corporeal beings, he
might well take this to transcend the concept of shape, or at any rate to transcend
the traditional geometrical conception of shape that is supposed to be one of the
modes of the Cartesian attribute of extension. But if an attribution of fractal
structure is consistent with the denial of there being such a thing as an inﬁnitely
complex shape, then the dispute at this point would be only about a word. What
matters here is whether Leibniz’s philosophy of body countenances the idea of
inﬁnitely complex structure that might coherently (and realistically construed) be
ascribed to a corporeal being.
Against this, Adams supposes that Leibniz would have thought the idea of an
inﬁnitely complex shape to be ‘‘an absurd and impossible monstrosity.’’ Since the
deﬁnition Adams offers of inﬁnitely complex shape is actually weaker than what I
have been prepared to ascribe to Leibnizian bodies—on the fractal conception one
could add that the inﬁnitely complex line segment changes the direction of its
change of curvature inﬁnitely many times in every ﬁnite subinterval—his supposition about Leibniz’s hostility toward the idea of inﬁnitely complex shape certainly
would, if correct, count strongly against my interpretation. But I think Adams is
mistaken in what he supposes here about Leibniz. For Leibniz was well acquainted
with mathematical structures that appear to display the very properties Adams
mentions, and it seems in accord with Leibniz’s own work in mathematics to see
him as entirely receptive to them. Take as a simple example the expression for the
value p/4 that is given by an oscillating inﬁnite series of rational fractions:
p/4 ¼ 1/1 – 1/3 þ 1/5 – 1/7 þ 1/9 – 1/11 þ etc. ad inﬁnitum.
The series of fractions—called Leibniz’s series for his discovery of it in 1673—can
naturally be graphed by a curve that passes, say, above and below the line y ¼ p/4
inﬁnitely many times between 0 and 1 on the x-axis. It is unlikely that this would
have been lost on Leibniz. Another example to be drawn from Leibniz’s texts, and
one with which he was clearly quite taken, is the idea of packing a ﬁnite space with
nonoverlapping spheres.28 A simpliﬁed case ﬁlls a polygonal piece of the plane with
an inﬁnity of nonoverlapping circles whose radii decrease geometrically without
bound (the interstices between the larger circles being ﬁlled by ever smaller ones ad
inﬁnitum). Expand the circles into spheres, and the bubbled surface (top or bottom)
that now results from the initially ﬂat polygon will contain an inﬁnity of changes of
direction of curvature despite its being a ﬁnitely bounded piece of the plane.29
Would Leibniz really have thought examples like this to be absurd monstrosities? It
seems more typical of his attitude toward uncovering such instances of inﬁnite

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 87

complexity within ﬁnite objects to ﬁnd them wondrous—further testimony to the
marvelous nature of the secrets hidden in mathematics. And indeed if ‘‘everything is
full of globes’’ (A 6.4:1933), such inﬁnitely complex fractal shapes will be found in
every portion of matter however small.
Sleigh, like Adams, understands Leibniz to argue against the presence of
ﬁnitely complex shapes in nature on the ground that such shapes are insufﬁciently
complex to allow bodies to represent the inﬁnite world. Sleigh’s account does not
rely on the doctrines of soul-body expression and monadic mirroring, however, but
rather places in the central role of the argument the physical accommodation of a
ﬁnite body to the inﬁnity of distinct motions of the other bodies in the universe. As
he sees it, the argument from (1) the claim that bodies are actually inﬁnitely
subdivided and that each body contributes to the motion and shape of every other
body to (2) the thesis that there are no precise shapes in bodies runs as follows:
Let x be any material object (corporeal substance or aggregate thereof). Let S be
any shape of any degree of complexity. S cannot be the shape of x because,
however complex it is, it represents the inﬂuence on x (via impressed motion) of
only ﬁnitely many other bodies. Given the actual inﬁnite division of matter,
whatever shape we assign to x, it is not complex enough, because it fails to take
into account the inﬂuence (via impressed motion) of inﬁnitely many other bodies.
Thus baldly put, Leibniz’s reasoning may appear to need further buttressing. That
project I leave to others. My point is that whatever the merits of Leibniz’s argument, his conclusion was that ﬁnite material objects strictly speaking lack shape,
not that they have (per impossibile) shape of inﬁnite complexity. (Sleigh 1990: 113)

Thus on Sleigh’s account, an argument concerning the relations between moving
bodies in the universe, and expressed in terms neutral between realist and idealist
interpretations of body in Leibniz, yields a conclusion that threatens the ontological status of corporeal beings: strictly speaking, they lack shape.
Unlike Adams, Sleigh is expressly concerned to address the dispute over
realism about corporeal beings in Leibniz’s middle-years metaphysics by reference
to the critique of precise shapes. ‘‘The issue before us,’’ he writes, ‘‘is whether
Leibniz then held a realistic conception of extension and its modes, or whether he
looked to an idealistic, monadological analysis’’ (Sleigh 1990: 110–111). And he has
in full view the basic strategy of a realistic interpretation:
Those who ascribe to Leibniz a realistic interpretation of the relevant modes in
our time period construe matters as follows: Leibniz was engaged in arguing that
extension is not the essence of corporeal substance, that substantial form is, that the
substantial form of a corporeal substance is its primitive active force, and that reference to force, active and passive, primitive and derivative, permits a realistic
interpretation of size, shape and motion. (Sleigh 1990: 111)

As Sleigh goes on to note, motion and shape present two separate challenges to a
realistic interpretation. Can both of them be met? In the ﬁrst section of this essay
I considered a sketch of a realistic interpretation of motion according to which
Leibniz takes a two-sided view. Motion is change of place and, in our experience of
it, appears to be an absolute or real quality of individual bodies. In fact, however,
the appearance to us of absolute motion involves something imaginary and relative

88 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

to our perception, since we imagine ourselves or some other bodies in a given
system to be at rest. Yet in reality motion springs from ‘‘something real and absolute’’ (G 2:133) by virtue of which (relative) change of place occurs, namely, the
physical forces that are intrinsic to individual bodies and that support an absolute
distinction between rest and motion, though only God might be able to draw it
correctly. This was to serve, in outline, as a model for thinking about Leibniz’s
view of shape; and the analysis of shape I have offered is likewise two-sided. As
it appears to us in sense perception, an individual body is ﬁnitely complex. This
appearance, however, involves something imaginary due to the activity of the
imagination in covering over inﬁnitely many ﬁne details of the body’s actual
structure that are not held long enough in perception to be remembered, and it
does so by ﬁlling out our sensory experience of the body with the thought of
uniformity. Still, the reality behind the appearances is that of a corporeal world of
inﬁnitely complex corporeal beings whose fractal structure is at best only approximated by the precise shapes of the sort deﬁnable in traditional geometry.
About motion, Sleigh acknowledges the merits of the realistic interpretation
(‘‘there is much to be said in its favor’’), and he does a signiﬁcant part of the
philosophical and textual spadework on behalf of the Leibnizian reduction of
motion to force. He is less sanguine, however, about the prospects of a realistic
construal of Leibniz’s discussion of shape:
No such strategy will do with respect to the problem posed by Leibniz’s remarks
concerning shape. No one is likely to suppose that with the injection of form or
force into shapeless mass, it literally ‘‘shapes up.’’ (1990: 112)

In the absence of a parallel reduction of shape to force, Sleigh suggests, ‘‘the
realistic interpretation must be largely deﬂationary’’ (1990: 113). The deﬂationary
reading he has in mind is one that trades on Leibniz’s repeated proviso to the effect
that in the nature of things there are no precise shapes deﬁnable by us. This is on
display in many of the major texts concerning precise shapes: ‘‘any assignable
shape’’ (A 6.4:1622); ‘‘whose deﬁnition a ﬁnite mind can comprehend’’ (G 7:563);
‘‘that a ﬁnite mind can grasp’’ (G 2:277); ‘‘that we can deﬁne’’ (A 6.4:1648), and so
on. Those provisos do seem to express a real element of Leibniz’s view, but one
might wonder how much can ﬁnally be made of them. Sleigh describes the deﬂationary reading in this way:
According to the deﬂationary reading, when Leibniz asserted, somewhat mysteriously, that material objects lack determinate shape, all he had in mind was this
innocuous doctrine: take your stock high-school geometrical ﬁgures, or any others
‘‘deﬁnable by us’’ or that ‘‘possess in full force the properties that we learn in
geometry’’ (G 4:568/L 583); none of them is exempliﬁed by real objects in nature.
Of course, for any given material object, including any given corporeal substance,
there exists some shape such that the object has that shape. But given the intricacies of nature, that shape will be very complex, so complex that it is not ‘‘deﬁnable by us.’’ (1990: 113)

This reading is deﬂationary indeed, and, as Sleigh notes, ‘‘it deserves to be deﬂated
and rejected’’ (1990: 113).

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 89

Still, it appears that a realistic interpretation can take advantage of a less
deﬂationary reading of Leibniz’s remarks about the deﬁnability of shape. If Leibniz’s point about deﬁnability is that precise shapes are deﬁnable by us because they
are in principle ﬁnitely deﬁnable or constructible—for instance, if they are supposed to be constructible from algebraic curves or ones expressible by polynomial
equations of ﬁnite degree—then he is making a nondeﬂationary point with his
claim that there are no shapes ‘‘deﬁnable by us’’ in the nature of things. For not all
shapes are even in principle ﬁnitely deﬁnable in that sense. Suppose that nature is
everywhere fractal in structure; it could then be true that its ‘‘real shapes’’ cannot
be exactly described by ﬁnitely deﬁnable shapes and that no equation of any ﬁnite
degree can perfectly express the actual boundaries of any actual bodies. Thus
under that reading, there is a robust sense in which no shapes deﬁnable by us—no
ﬁnitely deﬁnable shapes, no ‘‘precise shapes’’—exist in nature.
The idea of such a distinction between shapes that are ﬁnitely deﬁnable and
those that are not was available to Leibniz. The distinction between algebraic and
transcendental curves,30 for example, was emerging during Leibniz’s time (Descartes was aware of the possibility of nonalgebraic curves as well, and he excluded
them from geometry proper on the grounds of their intelligibility to us).31 Likewise, the related distinction between algebraic and transcendental numbers was
gradually being recognized as well. Leibniz himself even gives an argument that
can now be appreciated as a (partial) proof of the fact that p is transcendental—
that is, that p is not only an irrational number but also one that cannot be expressed as the root of any polynomial equation of ﬁnite degree (see Arthur 1999b).
And of course the question whether there is a rigorously true and precise mathematical expression for incommensurable quantities certainly occupied his thought.
It is not news that Leibniz was deeply impressed by the distinction in mathematics
between ﬁnitely deﬁnable terms and those that transcend ﬁnite deﬁnition: it would
inspire him to propose a similar distinction to hold between necessary and contingent truths.32 If he does hold the fractal view of corporeal beings that I have
been suggesting, it would be natural for him to see a distinction of that sort
between the precise shapes of geometry and the kinds of structures that will exist in
nature, and to mark this distinction in terms of what is deﬁnable in such a way that
it can be comprehended by a ﬁnite mind. And this, I think, is just what we ﬁnd
him doing in those many passages where he sharpens his thesis about precise
shapes with that proviso.
To continue to ﬁll out the realistic intrepretation of shape, some defense
might also be given for the idea that corporeal shape, like motion, is to be reduced
to forces in Leibniz’s account. At least once, in the course of discussing the idea
that the notion of form in his theory of corporeal substance is to be understood as
primitive force, Leibniz mentions:
this primitive force or [seu] form of substance—which, indeed, ﬁxes shapes in
matter at the same time as it produces motion. (G 4:397)

This suggests that Leibniz thinks shape and motion are both results of force, and
thus the strategy of a realistic interpretation that ﬁnds a reductive analysis of the
modes of extension—now reconstrued along Leibnizian rather than Cartesian

90 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

lines—to force can be effective in both cases. The idea that force ﬁxes shape in
matter may make little sense if this has to presuppose a prior notion of ‘‘shapeless
mass’’ or matter existing entirely without forces or forms. Leibniz is sometimes
given to talking in that way when he imagines the compounding of form and
matter to yield individual bodies (see the 1669 letter to Thomasius at A 6.2:435), but
his considered view is more likely simply that the concept of force identiﬁes the
source or cause of the particular shapes in things. Matter is not some preexistent
stuff that comes to be arranged in a certain way by the superaddition of certain
forces; rather, what it is for there to be matter arranged into a certain shape is for
there to be a certain nexus of forces acting in a given space. The existence of
a corporeal being with its actual modes of (Leibnizian) extension, so to speak,
consists in the existence of a particular cluster of those forces. Extension itself is
to be understood as a diffusion of resistance,33 and thus the speciﬁc diffusion of it
into a given space constitutes a body of a speciﬁc shape. It simply makes no sense
to suppose that there might be a body of a given shape that yet has no forces acting
within it, for that would not be a real body at all, but at best only an illusion of a
body—like a rainbow or mock sun.
The Cartesian view of the modes of extension and the conception of body
deﬁned in terms of them suffer from precisely such a defect, however, by supposing
that the basic properties of corporeal beings can be conceived apart from forces.
Thus if there were only such qualities of shape, motion and extension in bodies,
then bodies would be nothing more than appearances in the mind—merely
imaginary phenomena no more substantial than the appearances of colors or other
sensible qualities. In September of 1687 Leibniz writes to Arnauld in defense of his
theory of corporeal substance that identiﬁes form or entelechy with force, and
against the Cartesian account:
[E]xtended mass considered without entelechies, consisting only of these qualities
[i.e., shape, motion, extension] is not bodily substance, but an entirely pure phenomenon like the rainbow. Therefore, philosophers have recognized that it is form
which gives determinate being to matter, and those who do not pay attention to that
will never emerge from the labyrinth of the composition of the continuum, if they
once enter it. (G 2:119)

The fantasy of a world in which geometry deﬁnes the essence of corporeal being
has to be dispelled in order to establish the true conception. The arguments
stemming from the analysis of the composition of the continuum can refute the
geometrical conception of body and thus clear the way to introduce the dynamical
account of body as consisting in force; thus in a text from 1683–85/6, Leibniz
remarks:
Concerning bodies I can demonstrate that not only light, heat, color and similar
quantities are apparent, but also motion, and shape, and extension. And if anything is real, it is only the force of acting and being acted upon, and so the
substance of body consists in this. (A 6.4:1504)

The realistic interpretation of shape, motion, and extension in Leibniz’s metaphysics of body should hold this view of the nature of body as fundamentally
constituted by forces to be Leibniz’s great insight into the nature of corporeal

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 91

beings; and it is an insight that has a pretty fair claim to being the truth about
corporeal beings as well.
A reductive analysis of shape and motion to force allows for a nuanced realism
about shape and motion as properties that belong to bodies as they are in themselves. In the manifest image of nature, bodies appear to us to be moving absolutely
and to be ﬁnitely complex geometrical objects; neither of those appearances can be
absolutely true of the world outside us, as can be demonstrated by an analysis of
the paradoxes of the composition of the continuum and by the argument from the
equivalence of hypotheses. Yet behind the manifest image is a corporeal world
constituted by forces that yield inﬁnitely complex fractal bodies and determine
those bodies to be in absolute states of rest and motion. This world is too ﬁnely
grained and too rapidly changing for a ﬁnite mind’s perception of it be sustained in
consciousness, and so the imagination rounds out a partial representation of the
world and thereby furnishes us with a sensory experience that leaves most of the
details of corporeal reality obscure. Thus the phenomena of motion and shape that
appear in our perception involve something imaginary. But by means of careful
philosophical inquiry, we can avoid being taken in by the illusions that ensnared
the Cartesian account and can form a proper understanding of how the corporeal
world is in itself.
This broadly sketched account of shape and motion—and of the corporeal
world in general—does not vindicate a realistic interpretation of Leibniz’s theory of
corporeal beings. It only defends that sort of interpretation against a line of criticism that would put Leibniz’s critique of precise shapes at odds with realism about
corporeal beings in his metaphysics. One lesson of this account of the critique of
precise shapes is that antirealists about corporeal beings in Leibniz’s middle-years
metaphysics will have to look elsewhere to make their case. But they may not have
to look far. The reductive analysis of shape and motion to force means that the
dispute over realism about corporeal beings will now be resolved into the question
of the nature and reality of force itself. On this point Sleigh remarks:
In numerous passages Leibniz identiﬁed the substantial form of a corporeal
substance with its primitive active force. Thus, in Specimen (G 7:317/MP 84–5), he
wrote: ‘‘This principle of actions, or primitive active force, from which a series of
states follows, is the form of the substance.’’ But, of course, we need to know
whether a realistic, nonmonadological interpretation of primitive active force is
Leibniz’s last word on that subject in our time period. (1990: 111)

In later writings, such as the correspondence with Wolff, Leibniz’s ontology of
forces seems to be very much an idealist one.34 In the middle years, by contrast, it
is less than clear that idealism is on Leibniz’s mind at all. Even by the middle of
the 1690s—which strikes me as a transitional period during which the theory of
simple substances is gradually taking hold in the foundations—the case for an
idealist analysis of forces is not yet certainly in place. In a passage from the 1695
New System, Leibniz writes of substantial forms:
I found that their nature consists in force and that from this there follows something analogous to feeling and to appetite; and that therefore it was necessary to
form a conception of them resembling our ordinary conception of souls. (G 4:479)

92 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

The issue of realism here would turn on the character of the analogy with feeling
and appetite. Does Leibniz mean in that passage to rest the account of force on
purely idealist foundations, or does he intend only to illuminate the idea of force
by reference to ideas we have already about the nature of the soul? I think this is
still an open question. Looking ahead to the later writings, it may be hard not see
the end of the corporeal world in Leibniz’s metaphysics. But it is another matter
altogether how the ontology of forces in the middle years is to be understood, and
no doubt an inquiry into the subject is in order. That project, however, I leave to
others.

Notes
My thanks to Christie Thomas, Ric Arthur, Jan Cover and Don Rutherford for helpful comments
and discussion.
1. Here and hereafter I use ‘corporeal being’ to cover both sides of Leibniz’s distinction—one
important to Leibniz but not to this essay—between corporeal substances such as an animal or a man, on
the one hand, and mere aggregates such as a pile of stones, on the other. See A 6.4:627, 1506; G 2:59, 72.
2. Parkinson (MP 249) and Arthur (LOC 423, n. 2) instead suggest 1686 as a date for Specimen of
Discoveries, which is plausible given the content of its discussion.
3. My translations of Leibniz’s writings generally follow RB, AG, and LOC, though I have
sometimes modiﬁed their translations without comment. For some passages I have also consulted
Russell 1900, L, MP, Sleigh 1990, Adams 1994, and Rutherford 1995a. Inaccuracies are my own.
4. In the New Essays of 1704, for instance, Leibniz writes: ‘‘I have already pointed out during one
of our previous conversations that you treat as simple many ideas which are not so. Motion is one of
them: I believe it to be deﬁnable, and the deﬁnition which says that it is change of place deserves respect.
Aristotle’s deﬁnition is not as absurd as it is thought to be by those who do not understand that for him
the Greek kinêsis did not signify what we call ‘motion’ but rather what we would express by the word
‘change,’ which is why he gives it such an abstract and metaphysical deﬁnition; whereas what we call
‘motion’—and he would call phora, carrying—is one of the kinds of change (tês kinêseôs)’’ (A 6.6:297).
See A 6.4:1559, C 590, GM 6:327.
5. For discussion of Leibniz’s theory of motion in this dialogue, see Arthur 1989, White 1992, and
Levey 2003.
6. In fact Leibniz has reached this conclusion already in notes on Descartes’ Principles of
Philosophy—evidently written at the end of 1675—in which he records the following observation, clearly
stating the main elements of the argument for the relativity of motion: ‘‘When two bodies are moved on
the globe of the Earth, the one from east to west, the other from west to east, the Earth can be understood
to be immobile. But also nothing prevents me from imagining in turn that I am on one of the smaller
bodies, which will thus be regarded as being at rest. Therefore it is clear that any body can be imagined to
be at rest, if only a sentient being is understood to be on it. . . . Of course we humans are accustomed to
attribute rest to larger bodies, and this for the sake of abbreviation or ordering of thought. Just as it is useful
to reduce two fractions to a common denominator, or the sines of two angles to the same radius; so it is
useful to suppose as immobile that which is of a broad and enduring cast’’ (A 6.3:214).
7. Leibniz will frequently repeat this argument against absolute motion (for instance, in DM 18);
for a relatively early example (c. 1682/3), see A 6.4:1463: ‘‘Thus concerning motion I have shown
elsewhere that it is not possible to determine which subject it is in. . . . ’’
8. See G 4:400. Also, from the ﬁfth letter to Clarke in 1715: ‘‘I grant there is a difference between
the absolute true motion of a body and a mere relative change of situation with respect to another body’’
(G 7:404).
9. Russell 1900: 86–89 advances a few pointed criticisms; see also Earman 1989: 130–134.
10. As Richard Arthur observes: ‘‘Leibniz had ﬁrst written ‘of the relative speed,’ and then ‘of the
force or a[ction],’ before ﬁnally settling on ‘of the action or relative motion’ ’’ (LOC 395, n. 9).

On Precise Shapes and the Corporeal World 93
11. See Garber 1995 and Fichant 1974.
12. Obviously the topic deserves closer study than can be offered here. For some discussion of
Leibniz on motion see: Russell 1900: chap. 7; Garber 1982, 1995; C. Wilson 1989: 205–217; Rutherford
1995a: chap. 9.
13. For discussion of Descartes on the nature of body, see Garber 1992a: chap. 3, especially 63–69
and 75–93. See also M. Wilson 1978: 83–88, 166–169.
14. For discussion see Garber 1985: 30, 78; Sleigh 1990: 166; Williams 1978: 228; Woolhouse 1993:
94–96, 102–115.
15. Loosely those arguments might be distinguished as addressing ‘‘diachronic’’ and ‘‘synchronic’’
considerations, but the distinction itself tends to undermine the synchronic side, since Leibniz will
ultimately deny that there is any purely synchronic or purely momentary structure in the world.
16. Levey, ‘‘Dans les corps il n’y a point de ﬁgure parfaite: Leibniz on Time, Change and Corporeal Substance,’’ forthcoming. See also Adams 1994: 230and Sleigh 1990: 211.
17. For some discussion of this point about intraplenary motion, see Arthur 1989; Garber 1992a:
chap. 5; Levey 1998.
18. This is of course Leibniz’s enduring view of points: see A 6.4:1648; G 4:491; A 6.6:152; G 2:370,
520; etc.
19. For further discussion, see Levey 2003.
20. For example, in the Pacidius itself we ﬁnd: ‘‘Quemadmodum polygonum regulare inﬁnitorum
laterum pro circulo metaphyisce haberi non potest, tametsi in Geometria pro circulo habeatur, ob
errorem minorem quam ut numero ullo a nobis exprimi possit’’ (A 6.3:569; in the critical apparatus,
reconstructed by Beeley 1999: 140, n. 70).
21. See GM 4:95–96. For discussion, see Mancosu 1996: chaps. 2, 6, and Arthur 1998: 36–37.
22. Leibniz is evidently worried about the paradoxes of the continuum taking hold for mental
images of mathematical objects as well: ‘‘But what if that image does not represent any polygons at all?
Then the image presented to the mind is a perfect circle. Here there is a surprising and subtle difﬁculty.
For even if the image is false, the entity in it is nevertheless true; and so it follows that in the mind there
is a perfect circle, or rather, there is a real image. Therefore everything else will also exist in the mind:
and in it everything that I denied to be possible will now be possible’’ (A 6.3:499).
23. Leibniz goes on to say: ‘‘all those notions in which the heap or Sorites of the Stoics applies,
such as wealth, poverty, baldness, heat, cold, tepidness, white and black, big and small, taken absolutely,
are vague imaginary notions’’ (A 6.3:70).
24. More precisely, the notions of shape and motion are ranked near to those of the sensible
qualities; Leibniz typically qualiﬁes this classiﬁcation by pointing out that the sensible qualities are even
more imaginary than the Cartesian modes of extension. See A 6.4:1545.
25. Previously dated to 1686, it is now also retitled Principia Logico-Metaphysica in the Akademie
edition; see A 6.4:1643.
26. There is also a distinction to be drawn between purely imaginary phenomena—phantasms
or pure illusions—and what Leibniz will call real phenomena, or the appearances of real things to
us; Leibniz discusses this distinction in some detail in De modo distinguendi phaenomena realia ab
imaginariis (c. 1683–85/6, A 6.4:1498–1504). For some discussion, see Adams 1994: 256
27. Leibniz in several places holds that ‘inﬁnite’ and its cognates are to be understood as syncategorematic terms; for instance in the New Essays he writes: ‘‘It is perfectly correct to say that there
is an inﬁnity of things, i.e. that there are always more of them than one can specify. But it is easy to
demonstrate that there is no inﬁnite number, nor any inﬁnite line or other inﬁnite quantity, if these are
taken to be genuine wholes. The Scholastics were taking that view, or should have been doing so, when
they allowed a ‘syncategorematic’ inﬁnite, as they called it, but not a ‘categorematic’ one’’ (A 6.6:157).
See A 6.3:503 and G 2:304–305. For discussion of Leibniz’s view of the inﬁnite as syncategorematic see
Ishiguro 1990: 78–100; Bassler 1998: 855, n. 15; Arthur 2001: 107.
28. One context of the appearance of the idea of sphere-packing is Leibniz’s use of the hypothesis
of inﬁnite division to make sense of the possibility of motion within a plenum. Leibniz writes: ‘‘Now if
we suppose that every body is actually divided into parts, the objections against the plenum are easily
resolved. And it is truly evident that if everything is full of globes, then between the interstices new
globes can be placed again to inﬁnity without violating motion, for it is only necessary for the smaller

94 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
globes to move more swiftly. Now if it is possible for everything to be a plenum, then everything will be a
plenum, for it is absurd for any place to be left useless in which there could be an inﬁnity of creatures.’’
Metaphysical Deﬁnitions and Reﬂections, c. 1678–80/1 (A 6.4:1399). Compare also Leibniz’s remarks in
On the Plenitude of the World at A 6.3:525: ‘‘A wonderful plenum of the kind am I expounding is
reasonable, even though it consists only of spheres. For there is no place so small that we cannot
imagine a smaller sphere to exist in it. If we suppose this to be so, there will be no assignable place that is
empty. . . . [G]iven the plenitude of the world, it is necessary that there exist some globules smaller than
others to inﬁnity.’’
29. In the letter to Des Bosses of March 11, 1706, Leibniz describes a more complex packing.
‘‘Imagine a circle, and inscribe in it three other equal circles of maximum size; and in turn inscribe
within each of these new circles and within the interstices between the circles three equal circles of
maximum size, and imagine the progression to be thus to inﬁnity . . . ’’ (G 2:306). A natural expansion of
this case from families of nested circles to families of partially overlapping spheres would yield a ﬁnitely
bounded, inﬁnitely bubbled surface with further bubbles on the bubbles ad inﬁnitum, so that there are
inﬁnitely many changes of the direction of curvature in every piece of the surface however small—thus
satisfying even the much stronger condition on the sort of inﬁnitely complex shape that I would ascribe
to Leibnizian corporeal structure.
30. A (real) number is algebraic if it is the root of a polynomial, i.e., satisﬁes an equation of the
form: a0xn þ a1xn  1 þ a2xn  2 þ . . . þ an  1x þ an ¼ 0, where ai is rational. Real numbers that are
not roots for such equations are transcendental. A curve is algebraic if it can be expressed by an algebraic
equation.
31. For some discussion see Grosholz 1991, especially chaps. 1 and 2, and Mancosu 1996: chap. 3.
In a 1679 letter, apparently to Molanus, Leibniz remarks brieﬂy on the limitation of Descartes’ approach
to geometry—noting how even Descartes conceded that his method could not solve Diophantine
problems or ﬁnd inverse tangents—and says: ‘‘since then we have discovered things in geometry that
Descartes thought were impossible’’ (A 6.2:504); however, it is not clear just which discoveries Leibniz
has in mind.
32. Leibniz discusses this doctrine in many places; just as a sample one might consider The Source
of Contingent Truths from an Inﬁnite Process, Compared with the Example of Proportions between
Incommensurable Quantities (1689?, A 6.4:1661–1664); see texts N. 325, 326, 3271, at A 6.4:1649–1661. The
‘‘inﬁnite analysis’’ theory of contingency has also been widely discussed in the literature on Leibniz; for
some recent examples, see Hacking 1974; Mates 1986: chap. 6; Castañeda 1990; Sleigh 1990: 83–89;
Carriero 1993; Adams 1994: 25–30; Cover and Hawthorne 2000a.
33. The idea that extension is diffused resistance is suggested in many passage (see G 2:120; G
4:394; G 6:294, 584; G 7:398–399; GM 4:235); for some discussion see Hartz 1992: 529and Garber 1995:
291. See also Rutherford 1995a: chap. 9.
34. For discussion, see Rutherford 2004, and Adams 1994: chap. 13.

4

Leibniz and Idealism
DANIEL GARBER

ntil recently, it was uncontroversial to call Leibniz an idealist. And for good

U reason. As he wrote to De Volder in a characteristic passage, ‘‘considering the

matter carefully, we must say that there is nothing in things but simple substances,
and in them, perception and appetite’’ (G 2:282/AG 185).1 While the term ‘idealism’ was coined only after Leibniz’s death, so far as I can tell, the ﬁt is pretty good.
In Baumgarten’s Metaphysica (1739), for example, the idealist is characterized as
‘‘solos in hoc mundo spiritus admittens’’ (‘‘admitting only spirits in this world’’)
(sec. 402). One must be somewhat careful here. Leibniz’s monads come in inﬁnite
gradations of perfection, and at the lower level, are quite different from anything
he (or anyone else) would want to call a mind, strictly speaking. Furthermore, it is
quite important for Leibniz that the world of monads have an elaborate structure.
Though everything, in a sense, reduces to these nonextended entities and their
perceptions and appetitions, it is important to Leibniz that they be structured into
complexes with dominant and subordinate monads, which structures continue to
inﬁnity. But granting those complexities, insofar as everything, for Leibniz, reduces
to monads, and monads are in a broad sense spiritual substances, then Leibniz
would seem to be an idealist.
In recent years, though, this claim has become controversial. The disagreement is not about texts such as the Monadology or the great correspondences of
his later years with De Volder and Des Bosses. But some scholars have raised
serious questions about Leibniz’s views in the 1680s and 1690s, what have come to
be called the ‘‘middle years.’’ Scholars have suggested that during these years, the
foundation of Leibniz’s metaphysics was not the monad, or simple substance, but
the corporeal substance, matter united with form, understood on the model of the
animal. The suggestion is that in the middle years, Leibniz was not an idealist, and
that he may have recognized something in the world outside of simple and nonextended substances, something outside of mind, form, or what he later came to
call monads.2
95

96 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

The debate continues. While I used to be among those arguing against
Leibniz’s idealism, I no longer think that this is entirely correct. At the same time,
I also don’t think that Leibniz was an idealist during this period either. I think that
there is a third position that has been overlooked in the debate. What I shall
attempt to argue is that in the middle period, Leibniz simply did not hold a
position on the question of idealism. Neither an idealist nor an antiidealist, he was,
well, just a Leibnizian.
I shall begin by trying to articulate what Leibniz’s project was concerning the
nature of body in the middle years. Then I shall turn to some passages that, I think,
have misled scholars into thinking that Leibniz was more sympathetic to idealism
in his middle years than he really was. For Leibniz, of course, substances do not
interact with one another directly. Leibniz argues that the apparent causal relations
among substances must be understood in terms of the clarity or confusion of their
expression. I will try to show that these passages, suggestive as they are of his later
idealism, should be understood quite differently, in a way that doesn’t require the
idealistic interpretation that they are usually given. I shall conclude with some
reﬂections on the real nature of Leibniz’s project during these years, and why I
think that the issue of idealism is simply not Leibniz’s worry in this period.

Substance in the Middle Years
Let me begin with a crude outline of the position that Leibniz seems to have taken
in the 1680s, at least. While there are lots of texts one might cite here, let me begin
with some familiar ones from the correspondence with Arnauld. As we go along,
I will add some less familiar texts, and some texts that cloud the waters a bit and
suggest more complex views.
Let us begin with the following text, from the letter to Arnauld, April 30, 1687:
I believe that where there are only entities through aggregation, there will not even
be real entities; for every entity through aggregation presupposes entities endowed
with a true unity. . . . I do not grant that ‘‘there are only aggregates of substances,’’
and if there are aggregates of substances, there must also be genuine substances
from which all the aggregates result. One must therefore necessarily arrive either
at mathematical points from which certain authors make up extension, or at
Epicurus’s and M. Cordemoy’s atoms (which you, like me, dismiss), or else one
must acknowledge that no reality can be found in bodies, or ﬁnally one must
recognize certain substances in them that possess a true unity. (G 2:96)3

But what are these substances like? What is it that makes something a true unity for
Leibniz? Leibniz writes in a letter to Arnauld, November 28/December 6, 1686:
[E]very part of matter is in fact divided into other parts as different one from
another as the two diamonds [of the Grand Duke and the Grand Mogul]; and
since it continues endlessly in this way, one will never arrive at a thing of which it
may be said: ‘Here really is an entity,’ except when one ﬁnds animate machines
whose soul or substantial form creates substantial unity independent of the external union of contiguity. And if there are none, it follows that apart from man
there is apparently nothing substantial in the visible world. (G 2:77)

Leibniz and Idealism

97

In this way, the human being serves as a model for the genuine unities that are
supposed to ground the reality of the world. As Leibniz writes in a letter to Arnauld,
October 9, 1687:
[M]an . . . is an entity endowed with a genuine unity conferred on him by his soul,
notwithstanding the fact that the mass of his body is divided into organs, vessels,
humors, spirits, and that the parts are undoubtedly full of an inﬁnite number of
other corporeal substances endowed with their own forms. (G 2:120)4

In this way, the corporeal substances whose unity grounds the reality of body
are themselves made up of other, smaller corporeal substances, also unities of
substantial form and matter, and so to inﬁnity. Thus Leibniz writes in the same
letter:
I am very far removed from the opinion which states that animate bodies are only
a small part of the others. For I believe rather that everything is full of animate
bodies, and to my mind there are incomparably more souls than there are atoms
for M. Cordemoy, who makes a ﬁnite number of them, whereas I maintain that
the number of souls or at least forms is quite inﬁnite, and that since matter is
endlessly divisible, one cannot ﬁx on a part so small that there are no animate
bodies within, or at least bodies that have forms [informés], that is, with corporeal
substances. (G 2:118)5

Leibniz’s view here is very nicely summed up in a note he wrote in connection
with a conversation he had with Michelangelo Fardella in March 1690, during his
trip to Italy:
A body is not a substance but an aggregate of substances, since it is always further
divisible, and any given part always has another part, to inﬁnity. Hence, it is
contradictory to hold that a body is a single substance, since it necessarily contains
in itself an inﬁnite multitude, or an inﬁnity of bodies, each of which, in turn,
contains an inﬁnite number of substances. Therefore, over and above a body or
bodies, there must be substances, to which true unity belongs. . . . (A 6.4:1668–1669/
AG 103)6

Fardella, too, wondered about whether Leibniz had idealist leanings. In his comment on this passage, he wrote:
When dealing with a multitude of stones ABC, either stone A or B or C must be
understood ﬁrst. But it is not the same with a soul which, with other souls, does not
constitute body. (A 6.4:1670/AG 104)

Leibniz replied:
I do not say that the body is composed of souls, nor that body is constituted by an
aggregate of souls, but that it is constituted by an aggregate of substances. Moreover, the soul, properly and accurately speaking, is not a substance, but a substantial form, or the primitive form existing in substances, the ﬁrst act, the ﬁrst
active faculty. Moreover, the force of the argument consists in this, that body is not
a substance, but substances or an aggregate of substances. Therefore either there is
no substance, and therefore there are no substances, or, there is something other
than body. (A 6.4:1670–1671/AG 105)

98 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

This is, as I have said, a rather crude ﬁrst approximation of Leibniz’s view in the
middle period, and we will have to come back to it again for some additional details
and nuances.7 But there is one feature of it that I would like to emphasize for the
moment. As Leibniz understands them, the substances that ground the reality of the
world are complex entities, entities that contain other substances and so to inﬁnity.
In this way, there are apparently no ultimate elements in the analysis of bodies: any
level one reaches, however tiny the corporeal substances we may ﬁnd at that level,
contains levels tinier still, which also contain corporeal substances, and so on to
inﬁnity. In this way it is very signiﬁcant that Leibniz’s term of art in this period is
almost always ‘‘individual substance’’ and not ‘‘simple substance.’’ The classic deﬁnition of a simple substance is given at the beginning of the Monadology:
The monad, which we shall discuss here, is nothing but a simple substance that
enters into composites—simple, that is, without parts. (Mon 1)

Simple substances have no parts, and because they have no parts, they are unextended and must be understood on analogy with Cartesian souls. They are the
ultimate constituents of the created world: ‘‘These monads are the true atoms of
nature and, in brief, the elements of things’’ (Mon 3). But the individual substances
of the middle period are not simple in this way. Alexander the Great, to take the
example of an individual substance Leibniz gives in the classic passage, Discourse on
Metaphysics 8, is a corporeal substance, one that contains other corporeal substances
as constituents. Leibniz does, to be sure, worry a great deal about whether these
constituents, the smaller corporeal substances that make up the body of Alexander,
for example, constitute genuine parts or not. But however that comes out, Alexanderthe-corporeal-substance is not simple in the way a monad will later be.
Indeed, even the term ‘simple substance’ doesn’t really enter Leibniz’s philosophical vocabulary until somewhat later. According to the index of A, series 6,
volume 4, it appears only three times in the philosophical writings of the 1680s as a
designation for the soul or substantial form of a corporeal substance, though in none
of these passages does Leibniz claim that the simple substance is the ultimate constituent of reality. This is as opposed to roughly 130 appearances in the seven volumes
of the Gerhardt edition.8 Though a very few of those appearances are in the mid1690s, simple substances don’t seem to replace individual substances as Leibniz’s
central metaphysical entities, I would claim, until the beginning of the 1700s, perhaps
1702 or 1703. A survey of the texts very recently published in A, series 6, volume 4,
makes it quite clear that Leibniz’s world in the 1680s is a world of animate substances
in animate substances, all the way to inﬁnity. This, by itself, doesn’t altogether exclude the possibility of idealism. But it is signiﬁcantly different in inspiration from the
kind of monadological idealism announced at the beginning of the Monadology,
where Leibniz begins with simple spiritual elements from which all reality is built.

Matter and Confusion
So far in my account there seems little motivation to think Leibniz an idealist in
these texts, except for the fact that he was to become one later. But there are texts

Leibniz and Idealism

99

from the period that have led people quite reasonably to the view that his middle
years are not so different from the mature writings where monads dominate. It is
time to turn to them, and ﬁgure out what exactly they tell us about his views.
Let us begin with a complexity in Leibniz’s account of corporeal substance
that I ignored in the simpliﬁed account I gave earlier. Consider a passage from On
the Method of Distinguishing Real from Imaginary Phenomena, an essay written
between summer 1683 and winter 1685–86:
Concerning bodies, I can prove that not only light, heat, color and such qualities
are apparent, but also motion, shape, and extension. And if something is real, it is
only the force of acting and being acted upon [vim agendi et patiendi]. And
therefore the substance of body consists in this (as matter and form). Moreover,
those bodies which don’t have substantial form are only phenomena, or, at least,
only aggregates of true [substances]. (A 6.4:1604)9

This is a familiar theme from Leibniz’s writings in this period, that what is real in
bodies is not extension, but force. In this way, it is strictly speaking wrong to see
Leibniz as simply adding substantial forms to Cartesian bodies. Strictly speaking, he
wants to replace a characterization of the world in terms of extension and its modes,
characteristic of the Cartesian (and more generally, the mechanist) worldview, with
another, deeper characterization in terms of form and matter interpreted as active
and passive force. (This obviously connects with the science of dynamics, the science of force, that occupied Leibniz’s work in physics during these years. But that is
another subject for another essay.)
This, by itself, seems relatively unproblematic on the corporeal substance
view. A familiar Leibnizian theme is the fact that extension isn’t all it’s cracked up to
be, at least not all it’s cracked up to be by the Cartesians. Leibniz often complains
that if bodies were just extended, as the Cartesians claim, then there would be
nothing substantial in body, and that bodies would have the same status as dreams.10
Sometimes, as in some of the quotations I gave earlier, he seems to suggest that the
remedy to this problem with the Cartesian view is simply the addition of form. It is
only a small step further to suggest the view that extension is, itself, a derivative
notion, one that must be grounded in force, passive force in particular. This is the
view that is suggested in the following passage from an essay written between early
1684 and winter 1685–86:
Matter is the principle of being acted on [principium passionis], that is, the
primitive force of resisting, which is commonly called bulk or antitypy, from
which ﬂows the impenetrability of body. The substantial form is the principle of
action or the primitive force of acting. Furthermore, there is in every substantial
form a certain knowledge [cognitio] that is an expression or representation of
external things in a certain individual thing, in accordance with which a body is
per se one, namely in the substantial form itself. This representation is joined with
a reaction or conatus or appetite which follows this thought of acting. This substantial form must be found in all corporeal substances which are per se one. (A
6.4:1507–1508)

Here it seems that in reducing corporeal substance to active and passive force, he
isn’t exactly eliminating extension, but merely reducing it to what is, in his view,

100 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

more fundamental, namely the passive force by which a body excludes another
body. (Note here also that in this passage, Leibniz is careful to say that it is substantial form, the principle of action that expresses or represents external things, and
not the matter or primitive force of resisting. I will come back to that.)
But all is not quite that simple. The passage from On the Method of Distinguishing Real from Imaginary Phenomena I quoted earlier continues as follows:
Substances have metaphysical matter or passive power to the extent that [quatenus] they express something confusedly, and active power to the extent that they
express something distinctly. (A 6.4:1504)11

This passage suggests that active and passive power are to be understood in terms of
distinct and confused expression. This, in turn, would seem to suggest that matter
is to be understood as a feature of the perception of an entity that is capable of
mental states. That is, that activity and passivity are themselves features of mentality. That is, the individual substance composed of form and matter is itself mindlike. Or, at least, so this passage suggests on a very natural reading.
This passage is rather unusual for the period of the 1680s; it is the only one of
its kind that I know of. However, it does resonate with another feature of Leibniz’s
doctrine in the 1680s that is much more widespread, that is, Leibniz’s account of
causal relations. The doctrine is nicely summarized in the Specimen of Discoveries
(1688?):
That whose expression is the more distinct is judged to act, and that whose
expression is the more confused is judged to be passive, since to act is a perfection
and to be passive is an imperfection. Again, that thing is thought to be a cause
from whose state a reason for changes is most easily given. (A 6.4:1620/MP 79)

It is set out at greater length in section 15 of the Discourse on Metaphysics (1686):
[W]e ascribe to ourselves—and with reason—the phenomena that we express most
perfectly and we attribute to other substances the phenomena that each expresses
best. Thus a substance, which is of inﬁnite extension insofar as it expresses everything, becomes limited in proportion to its more or less perfect manner of
expression. This, then, is how one can conceive that substances impede or limit
each other, and consequently one can say that, in this sense, they act upon one
another and are required, so to speak, to accommodate themselves to one another.
For it can happen that a change that increases the expression of one diminishes
that of another. Now, the efﬁcacy [vertu] a particular substance has is to express
well the glory of God, and it is by doing this that it is less limited. And whenever
something exercises its efﬁcacy or power, that is, when it acts, it improves and
extends itself insofar as it acts. Therefore, when a change takes place by which
several substances are affected (in fact every change affects all of them), I believe
one may say that the substance which immediately passes to a greater degree of
perfection or to a more perfect expression exercises its power and acts, and the
substance which passes to a lesser degree shows its weakness and is acted upon
[patit]. (A 6.4:1553–1554/AG 48)

Or, as Leibniz summarizes his account in a passage that appears both in a letter to
Simon Foucher in 1686 and in Leibniz’s letter to Arnauld, July 4/14, 1686:

Leibniz and Idealism

101

One [substance] acts on another, since one expresses more distinctly than the
other the cause or reason of the changes, a bit like we attribute motion to a boat
rather than to the entire sea, and correctly so. (G 1:383; G 2:57)

From these passages, it would seem as if causal relations in the world of bodies for
Leibniz are simply a matter of the distinctness or confusion of the expression of the
substances in question. The temptation is strong to say that all there is in the
corporeal substance is the mental, and that the passive and the active, the two
constituents of the corporeal substance, are nothing but aspects of a single mindlike entity.
But it would be wrong to give in to this temptation. Read in the context of
Leibniz’s larger view here, a somewhat different and rather more complex picture
emerges. This is what I would like to argue in some detail.
Let me begin by noting that the term ‘expression’ doesn’t always involve the
mentalistic notion of a perception for Leibniz, nor does the thesis about the lack
of metaphysical causality always involve the distinctness or confusion of mind-like
entities alone. In his letter to Arnauld of October 9, 1687, Leibniz writes:
One thing expresses another (in my terminology) when there exists a constant and
ﬁxed relationship between what can be said of one and of the other. This is the
way that a perspectival projection expresses its ground-plan. Expression is common
to all forms, and it is a genus of which natural perception, animal sensation and
intellectual knowledge are species. (G 2:112)

Leibniz goes on to explain how it is that in this precise sense, every Cartesian body
expresses every other Cartesian body in the world of extended things:
Now, this expression occurs everywhere, because every substance is in harmony
with every other and undergoes some proportionate change which corresponds to
the smallest change occurring in the whole universe. . . . I believe that M. Descartes himself would have agreed with this, for he would undoubtedly grant that
because of the continuity and divisibility of all matter the smallest movement
extends its effect over neighboring bodies and consequently from neighbour to
neighbour ad inﬁnitum, but proportionally decreased; thus our body must be
affected in a way by the changes of all the others. (G 2:112)

Because there are no vacua, empty places in the Cartesian world, every event is
transmitted to the entire rest of the world. In this way, even Cartesian bodies,
without souls, without perceptions, can be thought of as expressing the entire world
in which they exist. To the extent to which the effects are ‘‘proportionally decreased’’ as the distances become greater, perhaps we can talk here about more or
less confused expression in Cartesian bodies (though Leibniz does not, at least not
explicitly).
The talk about mutual expression in the corporeal world does not, by itself, get
us causal relations, though. While every body expresses every other body in the
world in which it exists, and while we can get some handle on how we can talk
about distinct and confused expression among extended things, it is difﬁcult to see
how exactly to understand Leibniz’s thesis that links distinct expression to cause
and confused expression to effect with any concrete cases of body-body interaction.

102 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Now, Leibniz is quite comfortable about extending the thesis of the noncommunication of substances to the world of physics. For example, in the celebrated
First Truths paper, now dated to 1689, Leibniz writes:
Strictly speaking, one can say that no created substance exerts a metaphysical action
or inﬂux on any other thing. . . . What we call causes are only concurrent requisites,
in metaphysical rigor. This is also illustrated by our experience of nature. For
bodies really rebound from others through the force of their own elasticity, and not
through the force of other things, even if another body is required in order for the
elasticity (which arises from something intrinsic to the body itself) to be able to
act. (A 6.4:1647/AG 33)

But though it is easy enough to understand how the noncommunication of substances doctrine can hold in the world of bodies, it is more difﬁcult to understand
the other part of his doctrine of causal relations. Though nothing exerts a metaphysical action on anything else, strictly speaking, certainly Leibniz wants to say
that one body is the cause of the motion, and another the effect. But how is it that
distinct expression is linked to cause, and confused expression to effect in bodies?
Here, I think, Leibniz does slide into understanding the notion of expression in a
mentalistic way. How are we to understand this strand of his thought? And does it
force us to admit that during these years, Leibniz was, indeed, pressing an idealistic
metaphysics?
Discourse on Metaphysics 15, for example, seems to force us toward an idealistic reading of Leibniz’s thought at this time. But let me put that passage into its
larger context. In an earlier draft of the Discourse on Metaphysics, the passage that
was to become section 15 begins in a different way. In a passage found at the very
end of section 14, crossed out and replaced by Discourse on Metaphysics 15, Leibniz
gives his account of causal relations as follows:
It is certain, above all, that when we desire some phenomenon, and that phenomenon happens at a given moment, and that happens regularly, we say that we
have acted and that we are its cause, as when I will that which one calls moving my
hand. Also, when it appears to me that at my will, something happens to what I call
another substance, and that this happens by that means (as I judge by frequent
experiences), even though the other substance didn’t will it, I judge that this substance is acted on [patit], as I admit of myself, when this happens to me following
the will of another substance. . . . One can say brieﬂy that with respect to the mind,
our volitions and our judgments are actions, but that our perceptions or sensations
are passions, and with respect to the body, we say that the change which happens is
an action when it is the consequence of a preceding change, but otherwise it is a
passion. In general, to give our terms a sense which reconciles metaphysics with
practice, when several substances are affected by a single change (since, in fact,
every change touches them all) one can say that that which through this passes
immediately to a greater degree of perfection or continues in the same degree of
perfection acts, but that which becomes by that immediately more limited, so that
its expressions become more confused, is acted upon [patit]. (A 6.4:1551–1552)

It is a bit troubling, perhaps, that Leibniz deleted this passage; my own suspicion
is that he decided that he had gone into more detail than he wanted to in this

Leibniz and Idealism

103

context, and chose, instead, the rather more economical (and frankly enigmatic)
account of action and passion that he gave in the text of section 15, which begins
with a later draft of the phrases that end this rejected fragment (‘‘But, without
entering into a long discussion, in order to reconcile the language of metaphysics
with practice . . .’’). In any case, this passage certainly does give us some insight into
how Leibniz was thinking about causal relations. I want to begin unpacking it by
looking at what Leibniz says here about action.
The example Leibniz gives of an action is my moving my hand: when I have a
volition, and the motion of my hand follows in a regular way, that constitutes an
action. Clearly we are talking about a corporeal substance with a body here, a
human body, my body as I perform a voluntary action. It is the feeling of acting, the
feeling of having a volition that makes me the cause in this situation. This example
is quite consistent with what Leibniz wrote a few years earlier in a short essay about
motion, De Causa Motus, dated by the Akademie edition at summer 1678–winter
1680/1(?). In that essay Leibniz is considering the problem of the real subject of
motion: when two bodies are in motion with respect to one another, which is really
in motion and which is really at rest? There he wants to argue that real motion is,
in a sense, independent of change of place! In the essay he gives an example in
which a person is walking along a deck of a ship, while, at the same time, that
same ship is moving with the same speed that the person is moving, but in the
opposite direction. The person is at rest with respect to the shore, yet, at the same
time, he feels the effort of walking, and thus is moving, says Leibniz.
However, we should say that he is in motion: for, at any rate, that man will feel
that he is becoming tired by walking, and he will be able to push or pull something by means of his motion. And thus, he acts. Therefore, since we attribute
motion to that in which the cause of change of situation is found, that is [seu], to
that which acts, we will, at any rate, say that the body e moves, even if the place it
has in the world, and which is taken with respect to ﬁxed points does not change.
(A 6.4:2019)

Again, it is clear that we are talking about a corporeal substance, a soul and a
body. It is the volition in the soul that makes the person the actor in this situation,
but it is volition in an embodied soul. Leibniz’s examples only deal with human
agents, but it is not hard to extend this account to other agents. Since, Leibniz
claims, bodies are aggregates of corporeal substances, and all corporeal substances
are thought of as animate beings with forms (souls), on analogy with human beings,
they too could be conceived of as having something analogous to a volition when
they act.
Returning to the passage I quoted from the early draft of the Discourse on
Metaphysics, I think that it is fair to infer that it is having this efﬁcacious volition,
the feeling of effort followed by a motion of the body, that constitutes ‘‘passing to
a greater degree of perfection’’ for Leibniz. In that passage Leibniz doesn’t talk
explicitly about distinct expression in this connection, but from the fact that he
does talk about confused expression in connection with being acted upon, it is not
unreasonable to infer that having an efﬁcacious volition is what he takes to be a
state of distinct expression. This is quite consistent with the way Leibniz expresses

104 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

himself in the passage that appears in the contemporaneous letters to Foucher and
to Arnauld I quoted earlier, where he says that the substance that acts ‘‘expresses
more distinctly than the other the cause or reason of the changes.’’ Here we might
understand the having of an efﬁcacious volition as itself the distinct expression of
the cause of the change. Leibniz seems to have something similar in mind in a
passage from a note he wrote for a letter to Arnauld in November/December 1686:
However, there is good reason to say that my volition is the cause of the motion of
my arm, and that a dissolution of the continuity of the matter in my body is the
cause of my pain, since the one expresses distinctly what the other expresses more
confusedly, and one should attribute action to the substance whose expression is
the more distinct. (G 2:71)

In the case of action, Leibniz’s conception of causality in terms of distinct expression and increase in perfection may require a soul (or something like a soul),
capable of a volition (or something like a volition). But the examples he gives
suggest that he has in mind here an embodied soul, a soul whose volitions are the
causes of bodily motions. In this way there is nothing in Leibniz’s account of
activity that pushes us toward idealism. But the account of matter, passive force,
and passivity is somewhat more complicated.
In what sense, then, is confused expression connected with passivity and being
acted upon? Consider the case where I am pricked in the ﬁnger by a pin. When my
body is acted upon we are dealing with a case in which someone or something else
has the ‘‘volition’’ and I am not the cause of the state of my body. Here Leibniz
often talks explicitly about a ‘‘confused expression.’’ But of what is it a confused
expression? His position seems to be that I have a ‘‘confused expression’’ of the
cause, to use the language of the Foucher/Arnauld passage, and that that confused
expression is itself the sensation of pain. This is what he argues in a letter to
Arnauld, October 9, 1687, where he is discussing what happens in the soul when a
pin pricks us. He writes:
Now, states of the soul are naturally and essentially expressions of the corresponding states of the world, and particularly of the bodies which then belong to
them; therefore, since the prick forms part of the state of the body at moment B
[i.e., following the pin prick], the representation or espression of the prick, which is
pain, will also form part of the state of the soul at moment B. . . . (G 2:114; emphasis
added)

Remember also the passage I quoted earlier from 1684–1685/6, where Leibniz
implies that in the corporeal substance, it is the substantial form that expresses the
world: ‘‘there is in every substantial form a certain knowledge [cognitio] that is an
expression or representation of external things in a certain individual thing’’ (A
6.4:1508; emphasis added). When we are acted upon, this particular kind of confused expression, pain in the case of the pin prick, is the mark in the soul of our
passivity, the passivity that we possess as corporeal substances.
Understood in this way, Leibniz’s account of being acted upon in terms of
confused expression does not seem to require any strong idealistic metaphysics, any
more than his account of activity in terms of distinct expression did. Having pain

Leibniz and Idealism

105

would seem essentially to involve the body and its states. While one could perhaps
give a purely idealist account of what is going on here, Leibniz himself doesn’t: it is
the human being who is being acted upon, and the sensation is the mental expression. All the doctrine of causality requires is that bodies have souls and be
capable of perceptions as well as actions; it does not require that everything be soul.
Let us now return to that puzzling passage that started us out on these reﬂections:
Substances have metaphysical matter or passive power to the extent that [quatenus] they express something confusedly, and active power to the extent that they
express something distinctly. (A 6.4:1504)12

This can be read as an expression of idealism: for a substance to have matter is
simply for it to have confused perceptions. But it need not be read in this way.
Confused expression (perception) can be identiﬁed with matter. But confused expression could also be a consequence of the embodiment of a soul in an organic
body; this passage could be read as saying not that confused expression is what
constitutes matter, but that a substance or its form has confused expression because it
has matter. Leibniz’s later monadological writings suggest the former more idealistic reading, but the examples he uses contemporaneously with this brief but
pregnant passage suggest the latter. The pain I feel when I am pricked by a pin, when
I am acted upon, is a confused expression in my mind, my soul, my substantial form,
but in the texts that I have been examining, Leibniz makes no suggestion that this is
an event that does or could happen without the body. It is the corporeal substance,
soul and body that is acted upon, that suffers, but it is the mind that feels the pain.
Insofar as a mind has confused expression, it must have matter: the confused expression, on this reading, is the mark of the embodiment of the soul.
I don’t deny that what Leibniz wrote in the 1680s can be taken out of context
and made consistent with what he wrote ten or ﬁfteen or twenty years later in his
more unabashedly monadological writings. But these passages can also be made
consistent with what he wrote in writings of the same period, and it seems much
more sensible to do that than to try to argue that these few passages are, in some
way, glimpses of a hidden doctrine or preﬁgurings of what he will later think.

Leibniz Idealist?
What conclusions can be drawn from my reading of these difﬁcult texts? It has
been striking to me that even though one can interpret Leibniz’s writings in
the 1680s as consistent with his later idealism, there is nothing among the texts that
forces us to read them in that way, no place where Leibniz explicitly says that
‘‘there is nothing in things but simple substances, and in them, perception and
appetite,’’ as he will write to De Volder some years later. This led me in the past to
the view that Leibniz was not an idealist during those years. My assumption was
that Leibniz was some sort of realist during the 1680s and 1690s, and that he
recognized something, some kind of matter, distinct from soul, mind, or substantial form.

106 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

But it is just as difﬁcult to ﬁnd a clear and unambiguous statement of this kind of
realism in these years as well. Leibniz does say to Fardella: ‘‘I do not say that the body
is composed of souls, nor that body is constituted by an aggregate of souls, but that it is
constituted by an aggregate of substances.’’ This seems to exclude a strongly idealistic
reading of Leibniz’s views in this period.13 But, at the same time, what Leibniz says
about matter in the technical sense in which it is contrasted with form or soul is not
very clear, and does leave the reader wondering what exactly he had in mind.
Perhaps we are misunderstanding something here. Perhaps the issue of idealism and its contraries simply was not on the horizon for Leibniz at this moment
in his career. While he would later argue explicitly for idealism, at this moment,
I suggest, his philosophical interests lay elsewhere.
What were those interests? In the 1680s (and the 1690s too), I suggest, Leibniz’s
interest was in refuting the broadly Cartesian account of body, and replacing it
with his own. What he opposed was the idea that body is made up of extended stuff
alone, passive, inﬁnitely and arbitrarily divisible, continuous, and that there is
nothing else in body. The replacement he proposed was that body is composed of
substances, corporeal substances, matter and form: ‘‘the force of the argument
consists in this, that body is not a substance, but substances or an aggregate of
substances,’’ as he wrote in the Fardella memo. Sometimes, as in the Arnauld
letters, he emphasized that these substances are thought of as animate creatures,
little animals, like the ones that the microscopists were discovering every day.
Sometimes he emphasized that unlike the Cartesian world, there is life everywhere
in nature, and that there are an inﬁnity of souls in the smallest bit of matter.
Sometimes he explicitly related his view to that of the schoolmen, and argued that
he was reviving the substantial forms of the Scholastic philosophy or even the
distinction between natural and artiﬁcial basic to Aristotelian physics. Sometimes
he took the analysis deeper, and argued that form and matter had to be understood
in terms of active and passive forces, the forces that were central to the science of
dynamics that he was in the process of inventing during these decades. This was
the opposition that concerned him during these years, the opposition between the
Cartesian world of extended substance and inert bulk and his own living world of
soul and body, form and matter, active and passive force.
As to the question of whether it’s all mind or soul, or whether there is
something in the world that goes beyond, I don’t want to deny that he may have
raised the question with himself from time to time. But I do want to argue that it
was not his main concern, and that he did not have a settled position on the matter.
I see no evidence that he subjected the notion of corporeal substance to the level of
analysis that would have allowed him to address that question. It simply was not
part of his program. Or, at least, so I would claim.

Notes
Earlier (and shorter) versions of this essay were presented at the Seventh International Leibniz
Congress in Berlin in September 2001, and at the Leibniz Society of North America, meeting with the
Eastern Division of the APA in Atlanta in December 2001. I would like to thank audiences there for their
helpful comments. But above all, I would like to thank Robert Sleigh. Some of my earliest discussions of

Leibniz and Idealism

107

these issues were with him during the year we were together in 1982–83, when he was at the Institute for
Advanced Study working on what was to become his classic book, and I was visiting at Princeton
University and teaching a seminar on Leibniz. I would also like to thank him more generally for his
friendship and his philosophical wit and wisdom through the years. His kindness and enthusiasm for all
things Leibnizian has sustained us all.
1. Leibniz to De Volder, January 19, 1706.
2. See Garber 1985. My reading has been opposed by two important books, Sleigh 1990, especially
chaps. 5 and 6, and Adams 1994.
3. Translations of the correspondence with Arnauld are taken from LA. Since this translation is
keyed to G, I will not reference it separately.
4. I follow here the earlier text as actually received by Arnauld. See LR 187.
5. Again, I follow the text in LR 186.
6. It should be remarked that this is probably Fardella’s rendering of what Leibniz said in conversation.
7. One nuance worth mentioning is Leibniz’s frequent hesitation about whether or not anything
in our immediate experience, with the exception of us, indeed, whether or not anything at all but us
constitutes genuine substances of this sort in the world. Sleigh (1990: chap. 5) emphasizes these passages
to suggest that in this period, Leibniz was more of an idealist than I am inclined to make him. For a
discussion of Sleigh’s position here, and my answer, see my review of his book (as well as of Wilson 1989)
in Garber 1992b.
8. A search of G shows 133 texts in which the term appears. Of these one is before 1690 (Discourse
on Metaphysics 35), which also appears in A, ser. 6, vol. 4; there are two texts in which it appears in
the 1690s, a total of four occurrences in 1695–96 in connection with the Système Nouveau (G 4:279;
G 4:291–292). Other than that, there are a total of 130 texts in which it appears, the earliest being a letter
to De Volder in 1700 (G 2:206).
9. Unless otherwise noted hereafter, the translations are my own.
10. This is the theme of a short piece written by Leibniz somewhere between 1683 and 1685:
A 6.4:1466–1467.
11. ‘‘Substantiae habent materiam Metaphysicam seu potentiam passivam quatenus aliquid confuse exprimunt, activam quatenus distincte.’’
12. See note 11.
13. Pace Adams’s (1994: 275) somewhat contorted reading of this passage. I discuss the text in more
detail in my essay ‘‘Leibniz and Fardella: Body, Substance and Idealism,’’ forthcoming in the proceedings of the Florence Leibniz conference of November 2000.

5

Compossibility, Expression,
Accommodation
CATHERINE WILSON

n Leibniz and Arnauld, Robert Sleigh raised the following question: What is the

I relationship between the notions of compossibility, expression, and accommo-

dation in Leibniz’s writings in the period of the Discourse on Metaphysics and the
associated Correspondence with Arnauld? Each of these two-term relations is regarded by Leibniz as obtaining universally, between all substances chosen pairwise. For all actual substances, in other words:
1. x is compossible with y
2. x expresses y
3. x accommodates to y

According to Sleigh, it was for Leibniz a necessary truth that all actual substances are
compossible with one another, and the place of this theorem in his system is unproblematic. Clearly, the actual substances of our world cannot be incompossible,
so the proposition is trivial. But, Sleigh goes on to say, the claim that all actual
substances express one another, though treated by Leibniz as a necessary and even
trivial truth, does not seem to be trivial. And the claim that all substances accommodate to one another does not even seem to be a necessary truth, and it is certainly
not a trivial truth. It is unclear, he concludes, exactly what Leibniz meant by ‘‘accommodation’’ or, as he sometimes calls it, the ‘‘harmony’’ of two or more things,
above and beyond their ‘‘expressing’’ one another.1 Even though Leibniz claims that
universal harmony is a consequence of his theory of substance, it cannot be true that
compossibility entails expression, or, for that matter, that compossibility or expression entail accommodation.
Yet Leibniz sometimes sounds as though, given the nature of substance,
accommodation follows. At one point, as Sleigh notes, Leibniz even says that
accommodation, or ‘‘concomitance,’’ is a consequence of expression:
The hypothesis of concomitance is a consequence of the hypothesis I have of
substance. . . . The hypothesis of concomitance or of the accord of substances

108

Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation

109

among themselves follows from what I said that each individual substance envelops forever all the accidents that will occur to it, and expresses the entire
universe in its own manner. (draft of a letter to Arnauld, December 8, 1686; LA
68–70, as quoted in Sleigh 1990: 170)

And in a passage quoted later, Leibniz seems to identify expression with a state of
harmonious accommodation amongst substances. If the phenomena of different
substances failed to harmonize, ‘‘there would be as many systems as substances’’
(Sleigh 1990: 178). But Sleigh denies that Leibniz could really have meant that
concomitance was a logical consequence of universal expression, and if he did not
think it to be a logical consequence of universal expression, Leibniz could not have
thought it a logical consequence of compossibility either. And Sleigh calls Jacques
Jalabert to task for the suggestion that ‘‘universal harmony’’ follows simply from
God’s decision what to create; Sleigh argues that this is tantamount to accepting
the claim that compossibility entails harmony (1990: 172).2
For his part, though, Jalabert was surely right to suggest that Leibniz wished
to present experienced mirabilia such as the harmony of mind-body relations as
consequences that can be derived from or be seen to ﬂow from a consideration
of the nature of substances—what they must be. Often, it is the intention of a
metaphysician to derive, from a few apparently trivial, self-evident, or otherwise
unquestionable truths, some signiﬁcant, value-laden, action-orienting conclusions about our situation. (Consider Spinoza’s procedure in the Ethics, for
example, in deriving a whole chain of speciﬁc ethical propositions from some
seemingly self-evident truths about substance.) Acknowledging the problem of
explaining the nature of the entailments between compossibility, expression, and
accommodation, Sleigh expresses understandable frustration. ‘‘I have wrestled
with these matters for some time and I have lost,’’ Sleigh writes. ‘‘My hope is that
what follows will motivate someone to step forward and take up the challenge’’
(1990: 171).
The challenge is irresistible. Compossibility, to begin with, is an all-or-nothing
relation: two substances are either compossible or incompossible; they can’t be
‘‘barely compossible’’ or ‘‘extremely compossible.’’ But both expression and accommodation are relations admitting of more or less. Further, expression has a cognitive
dimension that compossibility lacks—if A expresses B, it seems that we can learn
something about B from examining A—and accommodation has a further aesthetic
dimension that expression lacks. If A and B are harmonious, a spectator can derive
pleasure from observing A and B. The instances of harmony and accommodation that
are to be found in our world range from the existence of simple and elegant laws of
nature, to the marvelous contrivance of the bodies of animals and the adaptations of
creatures of all sizes to their various environments, to laws of the union of soul and
body, and to the proportionality of ultimate rewards and punishments to deeds
(Rutherford 1995a: especially 199). Further, the harmony of substances is, in Leibniz’s
opinion, an excellence-making feature of our world, and reﬂection on it is supposed
to be ethically motivating. The mere compossibility of all the substances within it
cannot immediately be construed as an excellence-making feature.
So, in ‘‘deriving’’ harmony from compossibility, there must be a process of
what might be called ‘‘value-addition’’ that the commentator can bring to light,

110 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

that the reader is disposed to accept as nonarbitrary. How is this value added in
such a way that it can seem to a commentator like Jalabert that the intrinsic
implications of an idea have merely been ‘‘drawn out,’’ and that nothing has in fact
been added? The transition from compossibility to accommodation is mediated, as
Sleigh suggests, by the intermediate notion of expression, which already ‘‘adds’’
some value to compossibility. But harmony, concomitance, or accommodation of
things is more than the mutual expression of substances. Sleigh’s intuition that we
have three distinct notions in play3 suggests that the metaphysical situation (not in
Leibniz, but in reality) is as follows:
Accommodation —? Expression —? Compossibility
Compossibility —/? ? Expression —/? Accommodation

One of Jalabert’s points (I take it that Sleigh will go along with this) can be
conceded: in our optimal world, all substances that are compossible also express each
other and accommodate to each other. But if the metaphysical situation is as represented, there are some possible worlds, that is, worlds of compossible substances,
in which there is a failure of one or both of expression or accommodation. The
escalation, then, might be justiﬁed by Leibniz’s optimality-requirement. In that case,
it will be possible to describe a world of compossible, but non–universally expressive,
substances, and also to see what is inferior about that world with respect to a world
in which expression holds. And it will be possible to describe a world of universally expressive, but nonaccommodating, substances, and also to see what is inferior
about that world with respect to one in which both expression and accommodation
hold.
Indeed, worlds with compossible but non–universally expressive substances
are possible, but are not even possible Leibniz-worlds; possible Leibniz-worlds
must at least contain universally expressive substances, even if the substances are
nonaccommodating. Now, the ﬁrst claim implies that Leibniz-worlds are a subclass of possible worlds. Of course, anyone who believes that Leibniz’s conception
of substance and his theory of space and time constitute a set of logically necessary
truths will contest this and maintain that all possible worlds are in fact possible
Leibniz-worlds. But we are not forced, as yet, to that admission. It is prima facie
coherent to maintain that some possible worlds are composed of Leibnizian substances, others of material atoms, others of a single Spinozistic substance, others of
two substances as reported by Descartes, others of Aristotelian matter-form amalgams, and so on, insofar as none of these ontologies has been demonstrated to be
self-contradictory.
What would a world of compossible substances that did not express one another
look like? This condition is easily imagined. A world composed of material atoms
would instantiate it, as just noted, and so would many Descartes-worlds. It does
seem, though, that in all Leibniz-worlds, compossible substances do express one
another. For, if compossible substances did not express each other, then, since
substances have no intrinsic spatiotemporal relations, there would be no reason to
say that they existed in the same world.

Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation

111

This leaves the second question: what would a world of universally expressive
substances without accommodation look like? Sleigh believes that we can provide
a kind of model for expression-without-accommodation. And he employs one of
Leibniz’s own images, the image of the individually sequestered orchestra players,
to do so. Leibniz says:
This concomitance [accommodation] I uphold is like many different bands of musicians or choirs, playing their parts separately, and so placed that they cannot see or
hear each other but can nevertheless harmonize, by each one following his own notes.
(Leibniz to Arnauld, April 30, 1687; LA 95, as quoted in Sleigh 1990: 177)

Sleigh argues that the situation described models expression that is, in this case,
contingently associated with harmony:
Whether the separate bands succeeded in producing a euphony or a cacophony,
there would be a certain ‘constant and ﬁxed relation’ between the two based on
certain ‘inner states’ of the two groups—the notes and silences produced at a given
time. So one would express the other, whatever strange sounds were forthcoming,
that is whether they succeeded in harmonizing [accommodating] or not. (Sleigh
1990: 177)

Thus, a situation can be described in which there is expression without accommodation, and something over and above the former is required for the latter. The
pattern can ﬁt substances as well.
On Sleigh’s interpretation, as far as I understand it, the analogy works as
follows:
Notes played by Musician A express notes played by Musician B and Musician C
and . . . : The experiences of Substance A express bodily events b and c and. . . .
Notes played by Musician A harmonize with notes played by Musician B and
Musician C and . . . : The experiences of Substance A harmonize with bodily
events b and c and . . .

And Sleigh’s point, supporting his difference of meaning thesis, is that expression
in both cases stops short of what is required for harmonization. If a harmony and
not a cacophony is produced for a being-who-hears-through-walls, then Musicians
A, B, C, and D must all express each other’s scores. But the converse does not hold.
The sequence of notes and pauses played by Musician A can express whatever
is played by Musicians B and C without the being-who-hears-through-walls hearing
a harmony. For, even if they produce a cacophony, we can write out a table of
correspondences from the notes played.
The difﬁculty with this interpretation is that the players do not seem to express
one another; rather, they express a common score that exists in multiple copies.
If they did express one another, it is hard to see how they could produce a cacophony, and how they could in that case fail to accommodate. We can write out
a table of correspondences that documents what note each is playing at a given
moment. But merely being able to write out such a table of correspondences does
not imply that the musicians are expressing each other’s scores, not just their own
scores. Otherwise, any sequence could express any other sequence, and this is not
what Leibniz has in mind. Some correlations will fall short of the standard required

112

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

even of relatively poor expression. Suppose A is playing Chopin and B is simultaneously playing Beethoven. We could write out a correspondence table for each
temporal interval, but it is just false that the scores express each other. Expression is
a value-adding relation, relative to mere co-occurrence. It allows for degrees of perfection with reference to a standard of perfect expression, the type of expression that
we can image most adequately by thinking of the relation between an object and its
image in a ﬂawless mirror. An equation expresses a curve, a color-experience expresses certain ‘‘shapes and motions’’ pertaining to the underlying physical state of
the sensory organs (RB 403). And, when I perceive a jar of ink on my desk, it seems
that my soul expresses the ink jar, and perhaps expresses God as well, or even instead,
since, according to the Discourse, ‘‘although all substances express the whole universe, the other substances express the world rather than God, while minds express
God rather than the world’’ (DM 36/AG 67).4 So the problem of differentiating
expression from accommodation remains.
The claim that expression is value-adding might seem problematic in light of
the following well-known passage from the Discourse:
[L]et us assume . . . that someone jots down a number of points at random on a
piece of paper, as do those who practice the ridiculous art of geomancy. I maintain
that it is possible to ﬁnd a geometric line whose motion is constant and uniform,
following a certain rule, such that this line passes through all the points in the
same order in which the hand jotted them down. (DM 6/AG 39)

Clearly, the geometric equation expresses the physical array of points. And Leibniz
infers from the possibility of writing such an equation that ‘‘[n]othing irregular
occurs in the world.’’ That may be true. But he also claims: ‘‘We would not even
be able to imagine such a thing.’’ This must be false if there are possible worlds in
which substances do not express one another. One might infer from these remarks
that as long as two sequences are mathematically compatible (we cannot map real
numbers into integers or circles into squares), any sequence can be said to express
any other sequence. Leibniz appears to claim in the geomancy passage that all
phenomena are and must be orderly—that deep disorder is inconceivable because
we can always ﬁt some curve to the phenomena.
The passage is troublesome, moreover, because it appears to contradict Leibniz’s main point in his criticism of Descartes’ laws of motion. Leibniz complained:
‘‘From the Cartesian rules no continuous line whatever can be derived for the results
which correspond to the continuous line representing the variable data; on the
contrary, a ﬁgure is produced which is most erratic and contrary to our criterion . . . or to the law of continuity’’ (G 4:384/L 403). Descartes’ collision rules translated into a ‘‘monstrous’’ (discontinuous) ﬁgure that could not correspond to the
truth, represented by an ‘‘orderly’’ (continuous) ﬁgure (G 4:382/L 412). According to
the geomancy passage, as long as we can write down a law—any kind of law—and we
always can, the phenomena can be judged to be orderly, and it is not clear why
Descartes’ curve should not be judged orderly in its own way. But perhaps what
Leibniz was trying to say through his geomancy example can be put this way: Any
empirical phenomenon we observe or could ever expect to observe in our world,
no matter how chaotic or random it appears, can be described by rules. There must

Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation

113

be an equation that captures the location of spots on the leopard and stripes on the
zebra, and that can be used to predict where a handful of stones dropped from the
hand will fall. If the phenomena are complex, the laws describing them need not
be simple, but the laws of motion—being somehow fundamental—cannot be
complex.
And perhaps the rebarbative equation that I write to generate the array of
pebbles thrown by the geomancer is merely provisional. I regard the geomancer
merely as the perpetrator of a vain artiﬁce. I lay a piece of graph paper over his
stones and write a function. But suppose I am a serious student of stone-scattering.
I shall deepen my inquiry, and study the dynamics of stones projected from the
hand with a certain force and striking the ground a certain distance away. I shall no
doubt ﬁnd that, as with the natural process that distributes spots on the leopard,
there must be a beautiful and simple equation.
But what is it for substances to express states of each other, if they are windowless and have only internal, perceptual, and volitional states? Because this
question is seemingly unanswerable, the temptation to identify expression and
accommodation is overwhelming. But it can be resisted if we take Leibnizian
expression to be analogous to certain relations that can be described as occurring
between two beings who are spatially sequestered as they are in Sleigh’s example,
and who do not touch each other or touch any common objects. Leibnizian
accommodation can then be taken to be analogous to certain relations that can be
described between two beings who are in a common space and who touch each
other and/or touch certain common objects. The ‘‘walls’’ separating the musicians
signify the absence of a common spatiotemporal world, though, were musicians in
our world to be separated by soundproof walls, each musician would still touch his
ﬂoor, which would touch the walls of his chamber, which would touch the ﬂoor of
the musician in the adjoining room, and so on, so that the sequestered musicians
would be in mediated physical contact. To conceive the situation modeled, we
need to interpret their partial isolation as complete isolation. Here, to illustrate, is a
paradigmatic case of expression-without-physical-interaction in which we have to
take just the partial as modeling the complete.
Two identical twin acrobats are facing each other a few feet apart. When one
raises her right arm, the other raises her left. When one takes a step backward with
her right foot, the other takes a step backward with her left foot. We observers can
see that they are expressing each other’s movements perfectly: call this ‘‘imitative
expression.’’ And although physical signals are in fact passing back and forth between them, so that they are, from the physicist’s and the neurophysiologist’s point
of view, interacting, we can agree to regard them as noninteracting. We could write
a table that reads:
A right arm up ¼ B left arm up
A right foot backward ¼ B left foot backward
But suppose now that when A raises her right arm, B does too. They no longer look
like mirror images of one another; still, their expression seems to be imitative. Now
suppose that when A raises her right arm, B raises her left foot, but does so one-half

114 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

second later. When A raises his left arm, B raises his right foot one-half second
later. If we were making up a table, we could write:
A right arm up ¼ B left foot up þ :5 sec:
A left arm up ¼ B right foot up þ :5 sec:
This might be called ‘‘semiimitative expression.’’ Now, suppose that the ﬁrst time A
raises her right arm, B sings E-ﬂat, but the second time, B sings F-sharp, the third
time, E-ﬂat . . . , and so on. Now we could write out a table that said:
A right arm up 1 ¼ B E-flat
A right arm up 2 ¼ B F-sharp
A right arm up 3 ¼ B E-flat
So long as B is conceived as following a rule that speciﬁes that she respond to an
action of A in a speciﬁc way, we may be quite willing to describe B’s movements as
expressive of A’s, no matter how nonimitative they are.
But suppose we have to begin at the other end. Someone presents us with a
table of A and B correlated actions in which we can discern no pattern and can
state no rule. Under what conditions might we be persuaded that B expresses A’s
actions? Only if we can recognize A’s and B’s actions as variants of familiar expressive patterns in which it is possible to derive information about B from observing A (copying or mimicking, signaling with ﬂags or gauge readings, translating
notes or letters into sounds, employing an enigmatic code) or as (possibly failed)
attempts to produce some variant of a familiar expressive pattern, is there any
reason to describe the correlation as expression. When two musicians play individual sequences of notes that would produce a cacophony if heard by the beingwho-hears-through-walls, there is no reason to say that they are expressing the same
score, or each other’s scores, in the absence of further information about what they
are trying to do. The Chopin-Beethoven case earlier fails the test of expression
since we assume that musicians playing Chopin are trying to play Chopin and that
musicians playing Beethoven are trying to play Beethoven.5
Accommodation is also a scalar notion. Consider now some paradigmatic cases of
accommodation pertaining to bodies in physical interaction.
A and B are dancing together in a ballroom. They have clasped each other in
the way prescribed for waltzing. When A moves her right foot forward, B moves his
left foot back. When B heads off to the left, so does A. When one bends forward,
the other bends backward. Sensing resistance, A refrains from breaking B’s back.
They do not step on each other’s feet, or knock their heads together. Here is
another example: Two workers on a job site are building a brick wall. A lifts the
bucket of cement up to B, who pulls it up; B lowers the empty bucket to A, who
shifts her weight to balance it. Each adjusts her body to respond to the motions of
the other. And this harmonic behavior enables them to perform their tasks. Where
A and B are in the same space and physically interacting, and where B’s response to
A is an optimal response where human interests—having a good time at a dance,

Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation

115

getting the wall built, staying upright, not wrecking things and getting hurt—are
served, we observers will perceive harmony and accommodation.
Now imagine that our two dancers both try to move forward at the same time
or that they try to move off in opposite directions. Or, as builder A lifts the bucket
up to B, B pushes down on it, or as B lowers the empty bucket to A, it throws A off
balance. To the eye of the observer, there is now comic disarray. The movements
of A and B are inharmonious. Failure of accommodation of motions is the principle of slapstick. Stepping on the banana peel, I fail to accommodate my posture
to the motion under my foot and fall ﬂat on my back. Even slapstick has an order to
it. It would be possible to write out a table of correlations between Larry, Moe, and
Curly and the various objects in their physical environment including each other,
as Larry, Moe, and Curly bang things up and get banged up in turn. At no point do
Larry, Moe, and Curly or the objects in their environment violate any laws of
nature; accommodation is value-added with respect to interaction. Not just any set
of actions that can physically occur in the same space at the same time is harmonious, just as not every two piano pieces that can be played in the same interval
express each other.
So now back to Sleigh’s problem. I have rejected his claim that the mere
possibility of writing a table that correlates certain notes and pauses of Musician A
with notes and pauses of Musician B is sufﬁcient for it to be true that A and B
express each other’s parts. Must we nevertheless accept the claim that in any and
every world in which Substance A and Substance B do express each other’s states,
A and B also accommodate harmoniously to one another? Certainly the converse
seems to be true, according to the following passage from the Monadology.
This interconnection or accommodation of all created things to each other, and
each to all the others, brings it about that each simple substance has relations that
express all the others, and consequently, that each simple substance is a perpetual,
living mirror of the universe. (Mon 56/AG 220)

But the passage seems to contain the solution to the problem. It is ‘‘simple substances’’ that express, where expression is to be understood with the help of the
acrobat model, but ‘‘created things’’ that accommodate, where accommodation is
to be understood with the help of the dancer or builder model.
This hypothesis can be made to square with section 9 of the Discourse, which
says: ‘‘All other substances in turn express [a given] substance and accommodate
themselves to it . . . .’’ Evidently, Leibniz is talking here about our world, in which
there is both expression of substances and accommodation of things. But we have
succeeded in prizing apart the meanings of expression and accommodation by
stating conditions under which expression may occur without accommodation and
showing what value is added under accommodation. All that is needed for expression without accommodation to be possible is for it to be possible for there
to be worlds other than ours in which substances fail to project into a harmoniously ordered, common spatiotemporal (but nevertheless phenomenal) world of
‘‘things.’’ For the phenomenal world of spatiotemporally related, interacting
‘‘things’’ is a projection from the noumenal world of nonspatial, nontemporal,
windowless ‘‘substances.’’ (To say that level 2 is well-founded in virtue of the

116 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

existence of level 1 is to say that level 1 projects to level 2 in the way analogous to the
way that the ancient atomists and their seventeenth-century corpuscularian successors conceived the nearly qualityless atoms to project to a world of noisy, colorful, scented, ﬂavored, living things.)
Consider a possible world consisting only of Leibniz and Locke and the
monads that composed their bodies. These ensembles would project into Leibniz
and Locke—the embodied human beings—but not in such a way as to guarantee
their accommodation. Since only they exist and, ex hypothesi, no other objects or
people, they cannot meet or exchange letters. They cannot interact in a common
space of things; they can only express one another.6 And that is why Leibniz claims
obscurely that ‘‘the entire concept of space and time that we have is based on this
harmony’’ (letter to Arnauld, October 9, 1687; LA 115, quoted in Sleigh 1990: 178).
Leibniz explains accommodation as follows. Because ‘‘substances impede or limit
each other,’’ one can say that ‘‘in this sense, they act upon one another and are
required, so to speak, to accommodate themselves to one another’’ (DM 15/AG 48).
But Leibniz and Locke would not seem in this condition to limit or impede one
another, and so would not seem to act upon one another, or to accommodate to
one another either.
If this sketch is right, an interesting conclusion follows. There can be, not
simply a possible world, but even a possible Leibniz-world in which universally
expressive substances fail to project to a harmonious world. For, in the ﬁrst place,
the phenomenal, spatiotemporal world of interacting objects appears to be emergent, and to require some unspeciﬁed quantity—perhaps even an inﬁnity—of
individual substances. Just as two atoms, however real, cannot make there be
phenomena for the human eye, perhaps tiny duplex worlds and other small worlds
cannot produce the phenomena of spatiotemporal location, solidity, resistance, and
motion. They cannot produce a world that physics can describe. Some critical mass
of substances seems to be needed before we can have the sort of world in which
entities can impede and limit one another and can be said to act upon one another.
Further, even in possible Leibniz-worlds that are of a certain size, and in
which there is expression between substances, there is not necessarily harmonious
accommodation. Imagine a suboptimal but nevertheless possible world of sufﬁcient size to allow the emergence of a spatiotemporal world. In this world, groundstory substances might express each other regularly and perfectly, but, in the
phenomenal world of the upper story, persons, animals, plants, and inanimate
objects—whatever ‘‘created things’’ exist—would fail to accommodate to one another, forming a weakly or strongly disharmonious rather than a harmonious world.
In these worlds, some of what happens is like bad dancing and bumbling bricklaying, or a camping trip with Larry, Moe, and Curly. Perhaps, in such a world, the
‘‘laws’’ of nature can only be written down as monstrous curves, or keep changing,
or are written with pens that often fail to express the thoughts or to move in
accordance with the intentions of the writer. There might be neither pleasure nor
production in such a world. But in the best of all possible worlds (ours), on
Leibniz’s view, substances are strongly accommodating. The analogues of dancing
and building come easily; the laws we can write down are wonderfully simple and
elegant, and our ﬁngers and pens mostly do what we want them to. In some

Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation

117

possible worlds that are inferior to our own, compossible substances express one
another very inadequately.
To summarize, at least some possible Leibniz-worlds are, like ours, two-story
structures in which substances on the lower ‘‘foundational’’ story project into persons, plants, and animals, and material objects and their movements and changes
on the upper ‘‘phenomenal’’ story. Expression can be construed as a symmetrical
relation between ﬁrst-story substances, accommodation as a symmetrical relation
between second-story things. Substances project into all the foregoing sort of things,
and things are well founded in substances.
But doesn’t this account imply that it is contingent rather than necessary that the
maximum compossible set of substances projects into this sort of visibly harmonious
empirical world? This disagreeable conclusion can be escaped by noting that the
claim ‘‘It is necessary that [The maximum compossible set of substances projects
into a visibly harmonious world]’’ is shockingly ill formed. Necessary truths are true
in all possible worlds, and the truth-value of ‘‘The maximum compossible set of
substances projects into a visibly harmonious world’’ is arguably undeﬁned for all
worlds but ours.
Is this what Leibniz meant to say? Well, one could hardly hope to ﬁnd textual
evidence for such an anachronistic claim, and that is the source of my reservations
about having solved Sleigh’s interesting problem. But if there is a better solution to
the paradoxes of expression and accommodation, a solution that can show how,
under Leibnizian assumptions, accommodation or harmony ﬂows from expression,
which ﬂows in turn from compossibility, value being added at each stage, it has not
so far been presented.
Consider again the image of an orchestra in which each musician plays her part in a
soundproof room where she cannot hear the others. To the being-who-can-hearthrough-walls, the resulting sound, assuming each plays her part well, will be the
same as if each played her part listening to the others. And so it is with creatures:
each of us, considered as an individual substance, experiences his or her states and
doings in causal isolation from all the rest. Nothing can ﬂow between other creatures and us, such that we (transitively) see them. Nothing leaves my soul in virtue of
which I can inﬂate my arm and leg muscles, or move my tongue, or touch an object
outside of me. Each of us is a world apart. As Leibniz says in the famous letter to Des
Bosses of May 26, 1712:
One cannot prove from harmony that there is anything in bodies but phenomena.
For from other considerations, it is clear that the harmony of phenomena in souls
does not arise from the inﬂux of bodies, but is pre-established. And this would be
enough if there were only souls or monads, in which case all real extension (not to
mention motion) would vanish, and this reality would be reduced to mere mutations of phenomena. (G 2:444/AG 201)

Yet there is a common world in which we not only see each other but touch
each other, in which particles of light fall on our eyes arousing motions in our
nerves and causing us to see different colors, and in which pulsations of animal
spirits drive the movements of our bodies. Billiard balls smash into others, causing

118 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

them to rebound. Caesar crosses the Rubicon, inducing Vercingetorix to marshal
his forces. Leibniz insists that we can conceive ourselves both as musicians playing
together and as musicians in soundproof rooms. We can hear through walls as
inhabitants of the phenomenal world, but we also know that we really cannot hear
each other and that we do not need to in order to play our parts.7 It is not simply
the case that God—the one who can hear the orchestra playing together through
soundproof walls—hears the harmony, but that the musicians themselves do.
‘‘I’’—and every other monadic individual—can be found in two places: I exist
ﬁrst in the foundational lower story of immobile world-apart substances without
spatial location that project to the upper story, where objects, aggregates, and soulbody composites are engaged in the rough and tumble of physical interaction,
some of them coming into being and passing away. In the lower story, I do not
express external conditions, for there is nothing external to me, but instead I
express the internal states of all the substances of my world. But I also exist in the
upper story, for some substance projects to my empirical self. (Other substances
project to parts of rocks, trees, vegetables, planets, dust particles, etc. or to other
living organisms.) Where events in the upper story are concerned, to say that my
mind expresses what happens in my body, as well as everywhere else in the universe, is to say that there is accommodation between conditions in some nerves,
muscles, and sensory organs, such that they are part of my body, and the volitions
and experiences of my empirical self.
When one lower-story, ‘‘world-apart’’ individual—to employ Sleigh’s felicitous
phrase (Sleigh 1990: 110, 137)—is said to express an internal state of another lowerstory, world-apart individual, the only way to understand this is as the claim that
both world-apart individuals have the perceptions of the phenomenal common
world they have in the top story. The characterization of the foundational world
seems to be arrived at by considering what might be subtracted from our world, our
experiences remaining the same, just as the characterization of the sequestered
musicians is arrived at by subtracting their experiences of hearing one another. The
foundational lower story seems to be the projected upper story minus space, time,
causation, and the aggregations we call matter. So far, the analogy with the upper
and lower story of the material atomists is preserved, for the characterization of
their lower story too is arrived at by the subtraction of emergent properties. But the
experiences of every soul or self on the foundational level seem to replicate its
experiences in the phenomenal world, and this redundancy is hardly a positive
thesis of Leibniz; it is merely an awkward implication of the interpretation just
offered. Nevertheless, it is possible to understand why Leibniz thought as far into
this scheme as he did.
The claim that we are in some way like sequestered musicians is a response to
a gap in our theoretical understanding. We don’t understand how one thing can
make another move. We don’t understand how material atoms can produce experiences in minds. It seems utterly impossible. So—it seems—we must conclude
that we only think we see this happening, and conceive that it does happen, when
in fact no two things interact and nothing external produces internal experience.
But one can’t be pushed to the conclusion that, if a process is not intelligible to the
understanding it can’t occur, without being pulled by something else. And Leibniz

Compossibility, Expression, Accommodation

119

is evidently pulled by the notion that each substance in the foundational story can
be a world unto itself, overheard and overseen by God alone. What makes this idea
appealing is that it implies that, although we have to endure many things, we are
not, as Spinoza claimed, assaulted by external forces that no ﬁnite creature can
withstand for very long. Nothing is actually outside us; we are consequently invulnerable to predation on the part of others. Metaphysics can thus model for us a
morally ideal condition.
The image of the sequestrated musicians illustrates, ﬁnally, Leibniz’s claim
that the harmony of things is objective, not subjective. Spinoza had claimed that
harmony is produced by motions of the sense organs and the nerves (Ethics IApp/
CWS 445). ‘‘Men prefer order to confusion,’’ he says, ‘‘as if order were anything in
nature more than a relation to our imagination’’ (Ethics IApp/CWS 444). Leibniz
turns this argument on its head. If certain motions of the nerves produce the
experience of harmony in us, this is because there is a concomitance between
mind and body. That certain sequences of notes that we are able to play act on our
ears and brains in the upper story to produce such ecstatic experiences is only one
instance of the accommodation that distinguishes our world from inferior possible
worlds. To Spinoza’s remark ‘‘Men have been so mad as to believe that God is
pleased by harmony’’ (Ethics IApp/CWS 445), Leibniz’s response is that if God
were not pleased by harmony, there would be no reason for this world to exist in
preference to many other possible worlds composed of compossible substances but
in which there is neither pleasure nor production.

Notes
1. A look at their historical precedents does not really help to answer the question whether Leibniz
meant anything different by the two terms. His understanding of the term ‘expression’ seems to derive
from Spinoza’s notion that expressive relations obtain both between ideas and the human bodies that
have them, and between human ideas and God’s nature. The sources of Leibniz’s understanding of
harmony are more difﬁcult to trace. But in any case, the problem presented by the passages in question
is conceptual, not historical. ‘‘Singular thoughts, or this or that thought, are modes that express God’s
nature in a certain and determinate way’’ (Ethics IIP1/CWS 448). Compare: ‘‘Singular things are modes
by which God’s attributes are expressed in a certain and determinate way, i.e., things that express, in a
certain and determinate way, God’s power by which God is and acts’’ (Ethics IIIP6/CWS 498). Our
ideas are said by Spinoza to ‘‘indicate or express a constitution of [our own] Body (or some part of it)’’
insofar as ‘‘its power of action, or force of existence, is increased or diminished, aided or resisted’’ (Ethics
III, General Deﬁnition of the Affects/CWS 542). Leibniz’s uses of the term ‘harmony’ are very wide
indeed. As Rutherford (1995a: 13) points out, he deﬁnes harmony as unity in variety or diversity compensated by identity, though his actual uses of the term are difﬁcult to bring in under this rubric.
2. Sleigh quotes the following passage from Jalabert (1981: 87–88): ‘‘For Leibniz, the correspondence and the harmony [of nature] exist already at the level of the possibility of things, as they are
conceived by the divine understanding. Each possible universe includes such a correspondence: phenomena that are not harmonious cannot constitute the same universe. So the universal harmony . . . is
also pre-established in the sense that it is already constituted, from the possibility of things, that God
contemplates prior to his decision to create.’’
3. Sleigh 1990: 177.
4. However, the claim that humans express God rather than the world does not seem to be a
consistent theme of Leibniz’s, and its appearance here may represent a transitory moment of enthusiasm.
For a thorough survey of Leibniz’s uses of the term, see Kulstad 1977. Leibniz often offers asymmetrical

120 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
examples of expression. While the circle might seem to express the equation x2 þ y2 = 1, as well as vice
versa, it is not clear that Leibniz would agree that the state of the sensory organs and the external world
express the color experience. But it is not always the superior entity that expresses, for it is only humans
who are said to express the divine nature. But this is perhaps in virtue of their standing higher in the scale
of being than the nonminded expressers. Expression seems to imply a hierarchical relation of expresser to
expressed; at the same time every substance in the universe expresses every other substance. This oscillation between distinction and generality can probably be demonstrated elsewhere in the structure of
Leibniz’s metaphysics.
5. Wittgenstein’s answer to the question of when B is following a rule based on A’s actions was,
I think, that the inner state of B is irrelevant. B expresses A’s actions if and only if there is some
conceivable training process for B involving his observation of A that someone considers it functional or
at least amusing to inculcate in B (Wittgenstein 1958: 90).
6. This raises an interesting question: if only God and I existed in a Leibniz-world (provided this is
possible), would we necessarily accommodate to one another or only necessarily express one another?
Sleigh claims that God is not part of any world (1990: 181). Indeed, Leibniz describes God somewhere as
a ‘‘supramundane’’ intellect, implying that God is not an element of the world. But apparently, we do
express God, and the things a substance expresses seem to be coextensive with things in its world, so
perhaps the question whether God is an element of our world or not can be allowed to ﬂoat for the
purposes of the argument.
7. I borrow the idea of the two-storied house as a model for Leibniz’s metaphysics from Deleuze
1993. Deleuze conceives ‘‘downstairs’’ as a frothing mass of tiny unconscious creatures and ‘‘upstairs’’ as
the habitation of intelligent self-conscious spirits; my assignment to the two ﬂoors is different. Donald
Rutherford also allows two levels, one of which he describes as monadic, the other as panorganic: ‘‘They
represent complementary ways of understanding the universe: one from the point of view of reality as it is
in itself, a system of harmoniously related monads; the other from the point of view of the order determined by those monads’ expression of themselves as embodied creatures naturally subordinated to one
another’’ (1995a: 230). I take this to be closer to Leibniz’s intentions, insofar as Leibniz appears to be
substituting monads or immaterial atoms for material atoms as real causes of well-founded phenomena.
See Wilson 1989: 180. But I prefer to say that the (noumenal) monads express one another’s states while
(phenomenal) things, including the self of which I am aware and its body, harmonize, and that the
monads project a world (as material atoms project a world of substances and qualities) as well as expressing
the world they project.

6

Leibniz and Occasionalism
NICHOLAS JOLLEY

hat is really at issue in Leibniz’s critique of Malebranche’s occasionalism?

W Ever since Arnauld, readers have found it difﬁcult to answer this question. At

ﬁrst sight the difﬁculty is surprising, for superﬁcially the battle lines between the
two philosophers seem to be clearly drawn: Malebranche holds that God is the one
true cause, whereas Leibniz maintains that created substances are genuine causes
as well. Problems arise as soon as we encounter Leibniz’s claims to the effect that
occasionalism introduces perpetual miracles and that it appeals to God as a deus ex
machina; for even casual acquaintance with Malebranche’s occasionalism reveals
that it makes heavy use of the concept of law.1 Indeed, in the eyes of a critic such as
Arnauld, the problem with occasionalism is not that it leaves too much room for
miracles, but that it leaves too little.2 It may seem, then, that Leibniz’s critique of
occasionalism is directed against a straw man, and that the debate as a whole is of
little philosophical interest. It is true, as I will show, that some of Leibniz’s criticisms of occasionalism seem misguided, but such a negative verdict on the controversy would be a mistake, for the debate between the two philosophers centers
on fundamental issues in metaphysics and the philosophy of science.
Perhaps the best way of approaching the debate is to begin by considering
the deep philosophical motivation for occasionalism. In a famous chapter of The
Search after Truth entitled ‘‘The Most Dangerous Error in the Philosophy of
the Ancients’’ (6.2.3), Malebranche explains that the belief in natural causal
powers is a legacy of the despised Aristotelian-Scholastic tradition; such powers are
in effect occult qualities which must be rejected by a philosophy founded upon
clear and distinct ideas. Many years ago the French scholar Levy-Bruhl summed
up this aspect of the philosophical motivation for occasionalism when he remarked
that ‘‘as a worthy successor of Descartes, Malebranche replaces the confused scholastic notion of cause by the clear scientiﬁc notion of law’’ (quoted in McCracken
1983: 102). On this view Malebranche is the natural forerunner of Bertrand Russell,
who, in a famous essay, argued that the notion of cause was a relic of an outdated
conceptual scheme that had no place within the framework of modern science
121

122 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

(Russell 1913). If Malebranche is a forerunner of Russell, Leibniz, by contrast, is a
neo-Aristotelian who argues that the concept of natural causality must be retained;
as he puts it in the New System, explanations must be ‘‘derived from the order of
secondary causes’’ (G 4:483/L 457). What is at issue between the two philosophers
is not just whether laws are ontologically grounded in causal powers, but whether
laws constitute the rock bottom in scientiﬁc explanation.
The logical relationship between these two issues might be brought out in the
following way. It is clear that one can deny that laws are ontologically grounded in
causal powers without holding that laws are explanatorily basic: one might believe
that the latter role is indeed occupied by causal powers. More controversially, it
seems consistent to hold that laws are grounded in causal powers while also
holding that laws are explanatorily basic. For, as I will show hereafter, one might
believe that causal powers are located at a metaphysical level below that with
which science is concerned, and that they are thus irrelevant to the project of
scientiﬁc explanation.

Leibniz and the ‘‘Disturbance’’ of Laws of Nature
Recent commentators who have written about the debate between Leibniz and
occasionalism have helpfully distinguished logically distinct strands in his critique.
It has been observed that Leibniz’s objection that occasionalism introduces perpetual miracles is of wholly general application; it targets occasionalists’ claims
about the relations between bodies no less than their proposed solution to the
mind-body problem. But though this is Leibniz’s most celebrated objection to
occasionalism, it is not of course the only one; he also offers an argument that is
speciﬁcally aimed at the occasionalist stance on the relationship between mind
and body (Woolhouse 1988: 176). According to this objection, the trouble with
occasionalism is that its account of this relationship disturbs the laws of physics.
For the purposes of this essay there is reason to begin by addressing this strand in
Leibniz’s critique, since once the weaknesses of this argument are exposed we shall
see that he will be forced to fall back on a second line of argument that brings into
focus the real issue between Leibniz and occasionalism.
In the Theodicy and other texts Leibniz objects that Malebranche’s occasionalist account of mind-body interaction represents no real improvement over Descartes’ interactionist account; it too involves a disturbance or derangement of the
laws of nature (G 6:136). As Woolhouse suggests, Leibniz seems to have two distinct
charges in mind (Woolhouse 1988: 176). The ﬁrst is strictly physical: occasionalism,
like Descartes’ interactionist position, is inconsistent with the principle of the
conservation of momentum. When I raise my arm, the change in the momentum of
my arm must be counterbalanced by a corresponding change in momentum elsewhere, but it obviously makes no sense to suppose that this change of momentum
could be located in an immaterial substance (Woolhouse 1988: 175). The second
objection is more general and more metaphysical: occasionalism, again like Cartesian interactionism, fails to respect the principle that the mental and the physical
realms are alike causally closed; that is to say, mental events have exclusively mental

Leibniz and Occasionalism

123

causes, and physical events have exclusively physical causes. For Leibniz, this
principle implies that it is never the case that a physical event has a mental event as
either its real or occasional cause. By contrast, occasionalists are committed to
claiming that at least some physical events have mental events as occasional causes,
and that at least some mental events have physical events as occasional causes.3
Unfortunately for Leibniz, neither of these charges against occasionalism
seems compelling. The occasionalists can meet the ﬁrst objection by conceding
that, by virtue of the principle of the conservation of momentum, any change of
momentum must be counterbalanced; they must also concede that it is nonsensical to suppose that the locus of this counterbalancing could be an immaterial
substance. But there is nothing in occasionalism that precludes them from saying
that the change of momentum could be counterbalanced elsewhere in the physical
system. That is to say, there is no reason why Malebranche should not offer exactly
the same account as Leibniz himself of how, in the case of arm-raising, the principle of the conservation of momentum is satisﬁed.
The more metaphysical objection, which turns on the general principle of the
causal closure of the mental and physical realms, also runs into trouble. Robert
Sleigh has argued that Leibniz is not well placed to defend his principle against
occasionalism (Sleigh 1990: 166–167); in particular, with regard to the apparent
action of mind on body, he is not in a position to say that, for any physical event,
there is no sequence of causes, real or occasional, that has a mental event, such as
an act of volition, as one of its members. For he himself tells Arnauld: ‘‘Nevertheless, one is quite right to say that my will is the cause of this movement of my
arm . . . for the one expresses distinctly what the other expresses in a more confused
way, and one must ascribe the action to the substance whose expression is the more
distinct’’ (G 2:71/LA 87). If, however, Leibniz falls back on a weaker principle to
the effect that, for any physical event, there is at least some sequence of causes, real
or occasional, that has only physical events as its members, then again he is not
well placed to refute occasionalism. For as Sleigh points out, there is nothing in
occasionalism per se that precludes the recognition of some such quasi-causal
history. Perhaps Malebranche in fact believed in the absence of such a quasi-causal
sequence, but the problem would not be in his occasionalism but in his ignorance
of physiology (Sleigh 1990: 167).
This is a penetrating analysis of Leibniz’s position, but it is perhaps open to
Leibniz to say that his remark to Arnauld should not be taken at face value. When
Leibniz says that my will is the cause of the movement of my arm, he may be
speaking with the vulgar but thinking with the learned; the concept of expression
serves strictly as a replacement for the concept of causality rather than as an
analysis of it. Thus Leibniz might say that he is still committed to the principle of
the strict causal closure of the physical realm; by contrast, on his view occasionalism fails to satisfy this principle since it recognizes volitions as at least occasional
causes of some physical movements (as in the case of arm-raisings).
If Leibniz insists on this position, then it is open to the occasionalist to reply by
emphasizing just how weak is the conception of an occasional cause. Indeed,
Malebranche could say that talk of occasional causes commits him to no claims
about mental or physical events as metaphysically real causes; it is thus incapable

124 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

of constituting any sort of challenge to Leibniz’s principle of causal closure. Here it
is worth remembering that Malebranche has rightly been seen as an ancestor of
Hume, and the doctrine of occasional causes really amounts to no more than a
recognition of what Hume was to call constant conjunction.4 To say that events of
type A are the occasional causes of events of type B is to say that events of type A are
regularly followed by events of type B. Thus Leibniz cannot deny that volition is an
occasional cause of arm-raising without denying the existence of incontestable
empirical regularities. It is true that Malebranche might wish to challenge Leibniz’s principle of the causal closure of the mental and physical realms. But his basis
for doing so, I believe, is not that he is committed to the existence of at least quasicauses that straddle the two realms; it is rather that he wishes to insist that the
whole category of natural causality is an outdated one that has no place in ontology
or the philosophy of science. As Levy-Bruhl suggests, for Malebranche, the category calls for replacement by the more precise concept of law.

Miracles, Laws, and Natures
To discover the heart of the debate between Leibniz and occasionalism one must
turn to his notorious charge that occasionalism involves perpetual miracles; as I
will show, it is here that we ﬁnd the real controversy over the issue of whether laws
or causal powers are explanatorily and ontologically basic. When Leibniz charged
occasionalism with reintroducing perpetual miracles, Bayle expressed his puzzlement in a note to the article ‘‘Rorarius’’ in his famous Dictionary:
The reason why this clever man ﬁnds the Cartesian system not to his taste seems
to me to be based upon a false supposition; it cannot be said that the system of
occasional causes, with its reciprocal dependence of body and soul, makes the
actions of God into the miraculous interventions of a deus ex machina. For since
God intervenes between them only according to general laws, in doing so he never
acts extraordinarily. (WFPT 197)5

Today it is natural for us to share Bayle’s sense of puzzlement, for we are likely to
agree with his implicit conception of a miracle as a suspension of a law of nature;
moreover, as we have seen, even a superﬁcial acquaintance with occasionalism
reveals, as Bayle says, that its universe is governed by laws. Thus it seems that Bayle
must be right to say that Leibniz wholly misses the mark in charging occasionalism
with perpetual miracles. Yet such a reaction would reveal a misunderstanding of
Leibniz, for according to his deﬁnition, he is justiﬁed. For Leibniz, a miracle is not
to be deﬁned in terms of a suspension of a law of nature; it is to be deﬁned rather as
an event that exceeds the causal powers of created things (G 4:520/WFPT 205). On
this deﬁnition it is trivially true that, according to occasionalism, in the universe all
events are miraculous, for if genuine causal powers are at issue, then creatures have
no such causal powers (see Sleigh 1990: 162).
Leibniz’s insistence that a miracle is correctly deﬁned as an event that exceeds
the powers of creatures suggests a possible strategy for replying to Bayle. Consistent
with his deﬁnition Leibniz could have conceded that occasionalism recognizes
the existence of laws of nature; he could nonetheless have insisted that, given his

Leibniz and Occasionalism

125

deﬁnition of a miracle, such a recognition has no bearing on the issue of perpetual
miracles. Superﬁcially it may seem that Leibniz is indeed tempted by this strategy,
for he tells Bayle:
Let us see, however, whether the system of occasional causes really doesn’t involve
a perpetual miracle. Here it is said that it does not, because the system holds that
God acts only according to general laws. I agree that he does, but on my view that
isn’t enough to remove miracles. (G 4:520/WFPT 205)

But despite appearances, this is not the strategy Leibniz chooses to adopt. Leibniz
does not deny that occasionalism recognizes the existence of laws or rules in the sense
of divinely ordained regularities, but he does deny that such regularities constitute
genuine laws of nature. With regard to the occasionalist laws of the union of body and
soul, Leibniz writes, in some comments on Lamy: ‘‘But I do not at all agree that such
a rule would be a law of nature, nor that the general laws of nature are purely
arbitrary’’ (G 4:594). And, as Leibniz goes on to say, all miracles are exceptions to the
laws of nature, even if they are not to be deﬁned in these terms (G 4:594–595). Indeed,
it seems that Leibniz would recognize an equivalence here: x is beyond the causal
powers of creatures just in case x is an exception to a law of nature.
Leibniz’s position, then, is not that the occasionalists recognize the existence of
laws of nature, but that this is irrelevant to the issue of miracles; it is rather that the
occasionalists do not, strictly speaking, recognize the existence of laws of nature at
all. This has led some commentators to suggest that the real issue between Leibniz
and occasionalism is the proper conception of a law of nature. Donald Rutherford,
for instance, says that Leibniz wants to insist against Malebranche that laws of
nature are laws of the natures of things (Rutherford 1993: 145). There is no doubt that
Leibniz does wish to uphold such a claim, but it remains a question how it should be
interpreted. When the claim is properly construed, I believe, we shall see that the
fundamental issue between Leibniz and Malebranche is whether it is causes or laws
that have ontological and explanatory primacy. It is Leibniz’s commitment to the
primacy of causes that surfaces in his insistence that being an exception to a law of
nature is only a derivative truth about miracles; it does not constitute their essence.
One obvious difﬁculty in understanding Leibniz’s critique of occasionalism
on this score lies in knowing what he means by ‘natures.’ Rutherford seems to
assume that the natures of things are equivalent to their essences;6 on this basis he
argues that, according to Leibniz, for a generalization to qualify as a law it is not
sufﬁcient that it should describe a regularity willed by God; ‘‘it must, in addition,
be possible to conceive of the effects it describes as ‘explicable modiﬁcations’ of
the natures of their subject’’ (1993: 145). According to Rutherford, from Leibniz’s
standpoint the trouble with the occasionalist conception of a law is that it makes no
provision for the intrinsic intelligibility of the created world (1993: 147). In this
connection, and elsewhere, Rutherford speaks of Leibniz’s commitment to what he
calls the Principle of Intelligibility.
Rutherford’s assumption that the natures of things are equivalent to their
essences is not an unreasonable one; such an equivalence does indeed seem to
hold in the writings of Descartes and Spinoza, for example. Moreover, there are
some passages that suggest that Leibniz himself subscribes to such an equivalence.

126 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

In the Preface to the New Essays, for instance, Leibniz mounts a critique of
Locke’s ‘‘thinking matter’’ hypothesis that is in many ways reminiscent of his case
against occasionalism:
But to explain myself more distinctly: it must be borne in mind above all that the
modiﬁcations which can occur to a single subject naturally and without miracles
must arise from limitations and variations of a real genus, i.e., of a constant
and absolute inherent nature. For that is how philosophers distinguish the modes
of an absolute being from that being itself; just as we know that size, shape, and
motion are obviously limitations and variations of corporeal nature (for it is plain
how a limited extension yields shapes, and that changes occurring in it are nothing
but motion) . . . So within the order of nature (miracles apart) it is not at God’s
arbitrary discretion to attach this or that quality haphazardly to substances. He will
never give them any which are not natural to them, that is, which cannot arise
from their nature as explicable modiﬁcations. (RB 66)

A striking feature of this passage is its strongly Cartesian ﬂavor. For the Cartesians
of course the essence or nature of matter is constituted by extension, its principal
attribute, and any (nonmiraculous) property of matter is a modiﬁcation or way of
being of this attribute; thus being circular or revolving is supposed to be clearly a
way of being extended. Now Leibniz of course does not subscribe to the Cartesian
principle that the essence of matter is constituted by a principal attribute, extension; but he seems to be accepting the more general principle that any nonmiraculous property of matter must be an intelligible modiﬁcation of its essence or
nature. Thus for the purposes of arguing against Locke Leibniz seems to be
helping himself to a Cartesian identiﬁcation of nature and essence.
Yet it is more characteristic of Leibniz, in his attacks on occasionalism, to seek
to draw a distinction between the concepts of nature and essence. In the ‘‘Conversation between Philarethe and Ariste,’’ as Sleigh notes, Leibniz remarks: ‘‘One
can distinguish three degrees among predicates: the essential, the natural, and
what is simply accidental’’ (G 6:584/L 621; Sleigh 1990: 78). And in the antioccasionalist work De Ipsa Natura Leibniz clearly implies a distinction between
the concepts of nature and essence, even if he does not explicitly state it:
If, on the other hand, the law God decreed has in fact left some trace of itself
impressed upon things—if things have been formed by the command in such a
way that they are capable of fulﬁlling the meaning of the command—then it must
be admitted that things have been given a certain ability, a form or force (such as
we usually call a ‘nature’), from which the series of phenomena follows in accordance with the dictates of the original command. (G 4:507/WFPT 213)

Here the nature of a thing is equated with a force, and the force of a thing can
hardly be identical with an essence; on this view natures are rather those causal
powers or forces which the occasionalists are committed to denying. As Vailati
remarks, a crucial difference between essences and natures is that, for Leibniz,
God ﬁnds essences in his understanding, whereas through his will he is responsible
for the natures of created things (Vailati 1997: 149). Thus when Leibniz says that
laws must be grounded in the natures of things, he is claiming in these contexts
that laws must be grounded in causal powers.

Leibniz and Occasionalism

127

Against occasionalism, then, Leibniz maintains that a law or rule is not truly a
law of nature unless it is grounded in the nature, that is, the causal powers or forces
of created substances. Although this is perhaps his central objection to occasionalism, Leibniz is not always careful in his arguments for this thesis; indeed, his
arguments suffer from two weaknesses. Consider in the ﬁrst place Leibniz’s argument that since they are not thus grounded in natures—in the Leibnizian
sense—occasionalist laws of nature must be arbitrary:
But I do not agree that such a rule would be a law of nature, nor that the general
laws of nature are purely arbitrary. It is not an absolute necessity which has led
God to establish them; however he has been led to them by some reason consistent with his supreme wisdom and by a certain conformity with the nature of
things. (G 4:594)

In this passage Leibniz is making an entirely familiar point: his own position on the
laws of nature occupies a middle ground between Spinozist necessitarianism on the
one hand and Cartesian pure voluntarism on the other. But in seeking to show that
occasionalists are committed to an objectionable Cartesian voluntarism Leibniz
seems guilty of a non sequitur. From the fact that occasionalist laws of nature are not
grounded in natures or causal powers, in the Leibnizian sense, it does not follow that
they are thereby condemned to be purely arbitrary.7 To avoid this charge it is sufﬁcient that there be reasons for God’s choice of the laws that are instantiated in our
world; and Malebranche is insistent that this condition is satisﬁed. Indeed, Malebranche has a story to tell about God’s choice of the laws of nature that is similar in
key respects to Leibniz’s own: God’s wisdom is guided by considerations of simplicity
and fecundity.8 It may indeed be true, as Leibniz says, that God establishes the laws of
nature both by some reason consistent with his supreme wisdom and by a certain
agreement or conformity with the natures of things, but in order to rebut the charge of
arbitrariness Malebranche is under no philosophical pressure to concede the second
of these conjuncts. Thus Leibniz is wholly unsuccessful in his attempt to tar Malebranche’s occasionalism with the brush of Cartesian voluntarism.
In the second place, Leibniz seems guilty of a curious equivocation in his critique
of occasionalism. Consider Leibniz’s insistence that unless laws are grounded in
natures, they will still be perpetual miracles:
Thus it is not sufﬁcient to avoid miracles that God makes a certain law, unless he
gives creatures a nature capable of executing his orders. It is as if someone said that
God has ordered the moon to describe freely in the air or in the ether a circle
round [à l’entour de] the globe of the earth without their being either an angel or
intelligence which governs it, or solid globe which carries it, or vortex or liquid
globe which transports it, or gravity, magnetism or any other mechanically explicable cause which prevents it from swerving away from the earth or moving off
at a tangent to the circle. (G 4:595)

In this passage the thesis that laws must be grounded in natures is treated as
equivalent to the thesis that bodies must have natures capable of executing God’s
orders. But this way of explaining the thesis seems to trade on a confusion between
the prescriptive and the descriptive senses of the term ‘law.’ When ‘law’ is taken in

128 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

the prescriptive sense, Leibniz’s critique of the occasionalists has a certain plausibility. If I order you to run a mile in four minutes, my order will not have much
point to it unless you possess the appropriate physique; in Leibnizian terms you
must have a nature or set of causal powers that renders you capable of executing
my order. Analogously, God will not give laws, in the prescriptive sense of the
term, to his creatures unless he also gives them a nature capable of executing his
order. Clearly, in the background to this discussion is the principle that ‘ought’
implies ‘can.’
When the prescriptive sense of ‘law’ is at issue, Leibniz’s thesis is plausible,
but it is not at all clear that it is so compelling when the term is understood in the
descriptive sense; and of course it is natural for us to say today that this is the only
relevant sense. Certainly it is not difﬁcult to see how Malebranche might reply to
Leibniz’s strictures. As a good Cartesian Malebranche will of course concede that
bodies have an essence, extension, and that this essence does not logically ﬁx or
determine the laws of physics in our world; consistent with their essence bodies
might indeed describe circular paths instead of rectilinear ones. But it is open to
Malebranche to add that there is no need for God to endow bodies with a nature,
in the Leibnizian sense, over and above their essence. To bring about the observed behavior of bodies in our world it is sufﬁcient that God will the laws of
nature, for the fact that these laws are the volitions of an omnipotent being
guarantees that bodies behave in accordance with these laws. From Malebranche’s perspective the Leibnizian model of God’s activity involves a needless
duplication of effort on the part of the deity; not merely must he endow bodies
with natures but he must further decree laws that are somehow in conformity with
their natures.
Leibniz’s second criticism of occasionalism thus seems to trade on an equivocation between the two senses of ‘law’ that we are in the habit of distinguishing
sharply today. If Leibniz was indeed unclear about the distinction, he would have
been in rather good company; as various scholars have shown, the habit of thinking
of the laws of nature in prescriptive terms proved surprisingly tenacious among
early modern philosophers. Boyle, for instance, remarks that ‘‘nothing but an
intellectual being can be properly capable of receiving and acting by law’’ (quoted
in C. Wilson 1987: 162). Somewhat similarly Clarke observes that ‘‘Matter [is]
evidently not at all capable of any Laws or Powers whatsoever any more than it is
capable of Intelligence,’’ and again, that ‘‘dull and lifeless Matter is utterly incapable of obeying any Law, or being indued with any Powers’’ (quoted in Vailati
1997: 141, 142). Clearly Boyle and Clarke are thinking of a law of nature as a rule or
command that must be understood as a condition of being followed or ‘obeyed’ by
any of God’s creatures. It is natural to observe that the two senses of ‘law’ are likely
to be conﬂated when it is common ground among philosophers that laws are
divine decrees. Even so, though the theological framework may encourage such a
conﬂation, it does not of itself dictate it; it is still possible to distinguish clearly
between a prescriptive divine decree, addressed to bodies, of the form: ‘‘Fall to
the ground when unsupported,’’ and a descriptive one of the form: ‘‘Let it be the
case that unsupported bodies fall to the ground.’’ Moreover, as various scholars
have observed, no conceptual innovation on the part of early modern philosophers

Leibniz and Occasionalism

129

was required to make the distinction, for it had already been clearly drawn by the
late Scholastic philosopher Suarez (Vailati 1997: 142; see C. Wilson 1987: 162).
Despite the apparent parallels in the thought of Boyle and Clarke, it is difﬁcult
to believe that Leibniz was systematically confused about the status of the laws of
nature. This is not just a matter of conventional piety toward a great philosopher.
Apart from the fact that Suarez, with whose thought Leibniz was acquainted, had
already drawn the distinction, there are reasons internal to Leibniz’s system for
resisting such a view. As we have seen, there is evidence that Leibniz thought of
himself as forging a middle path between the necessitarian conception of the laws of
nature that he associated with Spinoza and the strictly voluntarist conception that
he attributed to Descartes: the laws of nature are contingently true, but morally
necessary in the sense that God’s choice of them is determined by his subscription
to the Principle of the Best. Clearly such a position makes sense only on the
assumption that laws of nature are universal propositions with a truth-value; if the
laws of nature were simply imperatival in form, the question of their status as
necessary or contingent would not arise. Perhaps, in the case of Leibniz, it is safe to
say that he was generally clear about the distinction between the prescriptive and
the descriptive senses of the term ‘law,’ even if for polemical purposes he was
sometimes tempted to blur the distinction. Indeed, trading on the prescriptive sense
may, on occasion, have served the purposes of an ad hominem argument, for as
Vailati remarks, Clarke exploited the prescriptive conception of the laws of nature
precisely in order to argue for a version of occasionalism (Vailati 1997: 141–142).

Occult Qualities
Some of Leibniz’s arguments for the thesis that occasionalism involves perpetual
miracles seem surprisingly ﬂawed. And Leibniz may not seem to strengthen his
case philosophically when, for polemical purposes, he further helps himself to the
notion of occult qualities. Commenting on the supposition that God could order
the moon to move in a circle without there being a mechanical explanation thereof,
Leibniz concludes: ‘‘To deny that it would be a miracle is to return to absolutely
inexplicable occult qualities which are decried today with so much reason’’
(G 4:595). Initially, what is perhaps most striking here is the irony of Leibniz’s
invocation of occult qualities in a critique of occasionalism. For, as we have seen, it
is plausible to suppose that the deep philosophical motivation for occasionalism is
the desire to eliminate natural causality as the last occult quality; the successor
concept to that of natural causality is the concept of law, and this concept is clear
and distinct because laws can be expressed in mathematical terms. Yet here Leibniz
objects that it is precisely the occasionalists who are guilty of reintroducing occult
qualities by their elimination of natural causality. Such a move on Leibniz’s part
may be rhetorically effective, but we may suspect that it is lacking in philosophical
substance.
In fact, such a judgment would be premature: Leibniz’s invocation of occult
qualities in his critique of occasionalism proves to be surprisingly illuminating.
Today when we think of occult qualities we are likely to call to mind the vis

130 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

dormitiva explanations of the Scholastics, and such dispositional properties serve
to clarify Leibniz’s case, at least by way of analogy. Consider a philosopher who
subscribes to the following commitments. First, ultimate scientiﬁc explanations
can be given in terms of dispositional properties; they are not merely placeholders
for deeper explanations in terms of microstructural properties. Thus, when we say
that the glass broke because of its fragility, no further explanation is called for or
even possible. Second, as a matter of ontology, these dispositional properties are
not grounded in anything more basic, such as the chemical structure of the glass.
Such a combination of commitments is likely to strike many of us as ‘‘Scholastic’’
in a pejorative sense. If we now substitute laws for dispositions, and causal powers
for nondispositional grounds, we are in a position to understand Leibniz’s hostility
to occasionalism. For Leibniz sees the occasionalists as analogously holding that
ultimate explanations can be given in terms of laws, and that these laws do not
need to be grounded in natures or causal powers. And to a neo-Aristotelian, such a
set of commitments seems as objectionable as the Scholastic position on dispositional properties is likely to do to us. Of course the case of dispositional properties
serves as an analogy only; it is not literally an illustration of Leibniz’s point.For
whereas we protest that dispositional properties need nondispositional grounds,
Leibniz objects that laws need to be grounded in causal powers, and thus what
plays the role of grounding, for Leibniz, is itself at least quasi-dispositional in
character.9 But the modern critique of Scholastic appeals to dormitive powers and
Leibniz’s critique of occasionalism have one important thing in common: they
both turn on the point that there is something seriously missing in the position
under attack; they both fail to satisfy the grounding requirement. And this is
sufﬁcient to enable us to see the point of Leibniz’s seemingly merely rhetorical
claim that occasionalism involves the reintroduction of occult qualities.

Laws, Causal Powers, and the Theory of Monads
One issue that has received little attention is how Leibniz’s critique of occasionalism is affected by the development of his system in the direction of the theory of
monads that is characteristic of his later years. Fortunately, Leibniz’s correspondence with the Cartesian De Volder supplies much of the material necessary to
answer such a question. In this exchange Leibniz is concerned not just to expose
the inadequacies of the Cartesian conception of matter for physics, but also to
explain the relationship between his science of dynamics and his theory of monads;
indeed, Leibniz insists that the theory of physical forces is the gateway through
which to pass to the true metaphysics (G 2:195/L 593). And though occasionalism is
not the principal target of attack in this exchange, it is not forgotten either; in a
number of places Leibniz insists that his theory of monads is the true alternative to
occasionalism.
Occasionalism may not be the chief issue in the exchange with De Volder, but
there is no doubt about the implications of Leibniz’s position for that system; in
explaining his theory of monads to De Volder Leibniz shows that he is in a sense
moving even further away from occasionalist tenets. Leibniz continues to maintain

Leibniz and Occasionalism

131

his principle that laws must be grounded in the natures of things, but his position is
complicated by the fact that he now recognizes two levels of grounding corresponding to two levels of forces. Against the Cartesians, including the occasionalists, Leibniz insists that the laws of motion force us to recognize the existence of
dynamic properties in bodies by virtue of which these laws obtain:
You very rightly observe, in agreement with my own opinion, that it is in opposition to the laws of power, cause, and effect, for a great body to be moved by a
smaller one without penalty. But from this fact I prove that the body contains
something dynamic by virtue of which the laws of power are observed. It therefore
contains something besides extension and antitypy, for no such thing can be
proved from these two alone. (G 2:184/L 520)

Such claims are of course all that Leibniz needs in order to distance himself from
the occasionalists, but in fact he goes further; for he now insists that ‘‘the forces
which arise from mass and velocity are derivative, and belong to phenomena’’ (G
2:251/L 530); what these physical forces derive from is of course the primitive active
forces of monads or simple substances. Leibniz is at some pains to emphasize the
explanatory autonomy of his science of dynamics; the physicist does not need to
concern himself with the properties of monads:
But in phenomena, or [seu] in the resultant aggregate, everything is explained
mechanically, and so masses are understood to impel each other. In these phenomena it is necessary to consider only derivative forces. (G 2:250/L 529)

But, as Leibniz goes on to explain, though the physicist need not concern himself
with such issues, the metaphysical truth of the matter is that these forces stand in
need of ontological foundations. When De Volder ventured to suggest that there
might be only such derivative forces, he received a dusty answer from Leibniz (G
2:251/L 530). Thus from the standpoint of his later metaphysics, the occasionalists
are at two removes from the truth, as it were. Not merely do they fail to see that
laws must be grounded in physical forces, but they also fail to see that these forces
must in turn be grounded in the reality of monads.
Although there is no doubt that this is Leibniz’s ofﬁcial later position, it is
worth asking whether monadology does not have the resources for a more accommodating reply to occasionalism. Let us begin by considering one famous
Leibnizian objection to occasionalism that we have so far ignored: the occasionalist conception of substance as being wholly devoid of genuine causal powers
leads to Spinozism:
This again shows that the doctrine of occasional causes which some defend can
lead to dangerous consequences . . . though the consequences are doubtless not
intended by its very learned defenders. Far from increasing the glory of God by
removing the idol of nature, this doctrine seems, with Spinoza, to make God into
the very nature itself of things, and to reduce created things to mere modiﬁcations of a single divine substance. For that which does not act, which has no
active force, which is robbed of any distinguishing characteristic, and ﬁnally of
all reason and ground of permanence, can in no way be a substance. (G 4:515/
WFPT 221)

132

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Thus Leibniz consistently subscribes to the principle that if x is not the bearer of
genuine causal powers or forces, x is not a substance. Suppose, now, that Leibniz
were also committed to the converse conditional: if x is not a substance, then x is not
the bearer of genuine causal powers or forces. Let us call this the ‘‘Principle of
Substantial Causality’’ (PSC). But in Leibniz’s later philosophy the only true substances are monads or simple substances; as Leibniz tells De Volder, ‘‘only simple
things are true things, the rest are beings by aggregation, and therefore phenomena’’
(G 2:252/L 531). Now monads occupy the ground ﬂoor of Leibniz’s metaphysics, and
are thus below the level of phenomena with which physics is concerned. Thus, if
monads alone are true bearers of forces, then any appeal to such forces would be
banished from the province of scientiﬁc explanations; such explanations would
appeal rather to ‘‘abstractions,’’ as Leibniz terms them, such as the laws of physics
(G 2:252/L 531). As metaphysicians we would indeed need to recognize that the
realm of phenomena—the subject matter of physics—is grounded in the properties
of monads, but as philosophers of science we could blithely ignore this fact; we
would insist on the autonomy of scientiﬁc explanations with respect to their
metaphysical foundations. Thus if Leibniz subscribed to PSC, he could still uphold
his metaphysical objection to occasionalism, but as a philosopher of science he
could accommodate the occasionalist insistence on the irrelevance of genuine
causal powers and forces to the enterprise of science.10
The evidence of the exchange with De Volder strongly suggests that Leibniz
does not subscribe to PSC; as we have already seen, he tells his correspondent that
the derivative forces belong to phenomena that are not substances, but merely
aggregates of substances (G 2:251/L 530). But though this is Leibniz’s ofﬁcial position, there are some passages—even ones bearing directly on occasionalism—
that seem more sympathetic to PSC. In places Leibniz seems to short-circuit the
discussion of physical, derivative forces, and move directly to a consideration of
forces at the ground-ﬂoor metaphysical level. Consider the following passage:
Last of all, you add: ‘‘Particulars act on each other and are subject to change with
respect to actions. How this can be explained by substances which do not act upon
each other is obscure to me.’’ This seems to be aimed at my opinion about the preestablished harmony between simple substances, which cannot act upon each
other. Yet they do produce a change in themselves, and it is necessary for this to
happen from your own point of view as well. For you acknowledged above that
there is an internal basis for forces or actions, and so we must recognize an internal
principle of change. And unless we do, there will be no natural principle of
change and therefore no natural change. For if the principle of change were
external to all and internal to none, there would be none at all, and we should
have to turn back with the occasionalists to God as the only agent. It is therefore
truly internal to all simple substances, since there is no reason why it should be in
one rather than another, and it consists in the progress of the perceptions of each
monad, the entire nature of things containing nothing besides. (G 2:271/L 538)

Here Leibniz argues directly for forces in monads on the basis that they satisfy the
demand for a principle of change that is internal to things; there is no suggestion
that this demand might be equally satisﬁed by recognizing a principle of change in
bodies, that is, at the phenomenal level. Perhaps it may be said that in this passage

Leibniz and Occasionalism

133

Leibniz is responding directly to an objection to his theory of preestablished
harmony, and that he does not mean to exclude the recognition of ‘‘principles of
change’’ at the level of bodies or phenomena. But at least this passage suggests that
the theory of monads contains the resources for conﬁning causal powers or forces
to the ground-ﬂoor metaphysical level; certainly there is nothing in such a restriction that would weaken the response to the metaphysical challenge of occasionalism. And if Leibniz were to respond in this vein, he could nonetheless
accommodate the occasionalist insight that science is an investigation into laws,
not causes. But ofﬁcially at least Leibniz is not prepared to take this line.
Leibniz’s debate with occasionalism has traditionally been seen as a rather quaint
and outdated controversy over God’s relationship with the created world. It is true of
course that the debate is often couched in theological terms: Leibniz famously
complains that the occasionalists appeal to perpetual miracles and that they invoke
God as a deus ex machina. But despite the theological language, the issues that divide
Leibniz and Malebranche are anything but quaint or outdated; in fact they are
surprisingly modern ones. For what is really in question is the nature of the scientiﬁc
enterprise and its metaphysical foundations. In this debate, as we have seen, a partisan of a law-based conception of science is confronted by a partisan of a cause-based
conception. There is of course a sense in which, by defending the latter position,
Leibniz is the more conservative of the two thinkers, but to say this is certainly not to
say that his position has been superseded. On the contrary, whether science is fundamentally about laws or about causes remains very much a live issue today.

Notes
Earlier versions of this paper were read at the California Conference on Early Modern Philosophy,
University of California, Irvine, July 2000, and at a conference entitled ‘‘Leibniz and his Correspondents,’’ Tulane University, March 2001; I am grateful to the commentators, Timothy Crockett and Justin
Smith respectively, and to the editors of this volume for helpful criticisms. Translations other than those
cited are my own.
1. Throughout this essay I restrict my discussion of occasionalism to Malebranche’s version of the
doctrine.
2. Arnauld draws a distinction between perceptible miracles (miracles sensibles) and hidden
miracles (miracles cachez) and claims that Malebranche’s doctrine of general volitions leaves no room
for miracles of the latter kind: ‘‘On the supposition of this distinction between perceptible miracles and
hidden miracles, one easily sees how it is an untenable paradox to claim that God does not act in the
order of nature by particular volitions, but only by general volitions.’’ Antoine Arnauld, Reﬂexions
philosophiques et theologiques sur le nouveau systeme de la nature et de la grace (Cologne, 1695), 1:196.
Arnauld’s example of a ‘‘hidden miracle’’ is the case of a holy bishop who is gradually cured in response
to the prayers of the faithful.
3. It may be objected that Malebranche cannot accept the principle of the causal closure of the
physical realm since he is committed to the thesis that every physical event has God’s volition as its real
cause, and God’s volitions are mental. The issue of divine real causality is a large topic that I cannot
discuss here. However, it may be said that God is the cause of physical events in the minimal sense that
he wills the initial conditions and the laws of nature that the events instantiate.
4. For a valuable account of Hume’s relationship to the philosophy of Malebranche, see
McCracken 1983: 254–290.

134 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
5. The original text is found in Dictionnaire historique et critique (Amsterdam, 1696–97), 1:967.
6. Rutherford (1993: 142) remarks that the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason requires that ‘‘within the
‘order of nature’ it is not enough simply that there be some reason for anything to happen as it does; in
addition, there must be what Leibniz calls a ‘natural reason’: a reason that displays the effect in question
as following in an intelligible manner from the nature or essence of some created being.’’
7. See Rutherford (1993: 145, n. 17): ‘‘Malebranche would obviously contest this charge [that
occasionalists are committed to the arbitrariness of the laws of nature].’’
8. Although there are similarities between Leibniz and Malebranche in their conceptions of
divine wisdom, there are also important differences; for example, as Rutherford says, unlike Malebranche Leibniz is concerned to uphold the conception of God as ‘‘an inﬁnitely skillful craftsman, one
who is disposed to create that world which in and of itself contains the greatest possible perfection’’
(1993: 158).
9. Donald Rutherford has pointed out to me that, for Leibniz, a causal force is not simply a power
that would act if certain conditions were realized, but a power that does act unless it is prevented. See,
for example, ‘‘On the Correction of Metaphysics and the Concept of Substance’’ (G 4:469/L 433):
‘‘Active force . . . contains a certain act or [sive] entelechy and is thus midway between the faculty of
acting [facultatem agendi] and the act itself and involves a conatus. It is thus carried into action
[operationem] by itself and needs no help but only the removal of an impediment.’’ Leibniz’s account
here makes it appropriate to describe causal powers or forces on his view as quasi-dispositional.
10. In this spirit Leibniz need not take a stand on the issue of whether terms that appear to refer to
physical forces refer to nothing at all or simply to nothing that is fully real.

7

Leibniz’s Two Realms
JONATHAN BENNETT

Leibniz’s Commitment to Mechanism
Leibniz insists that any bodily event can be explained purely in terms of ‘‘mechanism,’’ meaning impact mechanics. The latter’s laws are all quasi-causal (Sleigh’s
label) rather than causal; they describe patterns among events that are embedded
in the universal harmony, and do not imply that any body acts on any other. When
declaring how things must go in physics, Leibniz does not often remind us that his
topic is quasi-causation, not real transeunt causation; but that is always his view.
Similarly, in those contexts he seldom reminds us that bodies are phenomenal
rather than basically real; but in the mature years that is always his view too.
In his claim for the power of mechanism, Leibniz is refusing to explain any
particular events in terms of Aristotelian ‘‘forms,’’ for example, appealing to ‘‘the
form of oak’’ to explain why an acorn develops as it does. In this he aligns himself
with the Galilean revolution, which he sees has come to stay—‘‘the great light
of our age,’’ he calls it. This may be less a philosophical opinion than a reading of
where science is moving, and above all an upshot of seeing that after two millennia
of virtual stasis science at last is moving (see PAB, G 7:343–344/AG 319).1
Leibniz’s support for ‘‘mechanism’’ may be encouraged also by his denial that
any material event can be explained through a mental one. The Galilean revolution may encourage that denial, but not to the extent of requiring it. Descartes
was a prime revolutionary who ﬁrmly rejected the Aristotelian paradigm, yet he
held that human behavior requires some input from an immaterial mind. Leibniz
dissents: ‘‘I attribute to mechanism everything which takes place in the bodies of
plants and animals except their initial formation,’’ he writes at NE 2.9.11 (RB 139).
‘‘I do not approve of bringing in the soul when plant and animal phenomena have
to be explained in detail’’ (NE 2.9.11/RB 139). This holds for humans too.
Leibniz’s faith in mechanism’s extent draws strength from his conviction
that the value of this world consists partly in how simple the quasi-causal principles
are that govern it. Because, for him, mechanistic principles are unbeatably
135

136 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

‘‘simple,’’ his adherence to them pays tribute to God, ‘‘the reason for the greatness or
power in the mechanism of the universe as now constituted’’ (UO, G 7:305/AG 152).
My focus here is on Leibniz’s view that all the events with which physics
(including biology) has to do can be explained in terms of efﬁcient quasi-causes. To
explain any material event E, he holds, one needs to invoke only preceding events
that quasi-made E occur; not to later ones that E was for. Yet he also gives teleological concepts a place in the truth about the world. How can this be? That is my
chief question, and I shall evaluate Leibniz’s answers to it.

Three Roles for Teleology
Even if we completed a perfect total science, Leibniz holds, we ought still to ask:
Why are these the basic principles of physics? His answer is teleological; the principles obtain because God wants them to do so:
These laws of motion . . . cannot be explained by the mere consideration of efﬁcient causes, or of matter. For I have found that we have to bring in ﬁnal causes,
and that these laws do not depend on the principle of necessity . . . but on the
principle of compatibility, the choices of wisdom, that is. (PNG 11/WFPT 263)

This serves ‘‘to clear the mechanical philosophy of the impiety with which it is
charged’’ (DM 23/WFPT 75). It gives Leibniz—he says elsewhere—a basis on which
to protest against ‘‘the Spinozist view . . . which dismisses the search for ﬁnal causes
and explains everything through brute necessity’’ (RB 73; see also NI, G 4:505/
WFPT 211, and DM 10/WFPT 61–62).
That ﬁrst answer to my chief question raises no problem: a world wholly
governed by mechanism could, obviously, result from the purposes of its creator.
This, however, is philosophically uninteresting in Leibniz’s hands, as in those of
most Christian philosophers. They typically attribute activities to God without
considering how he performs them, perhaps assuming that God needs no ways or
means—no how—for doing anything, so that they can attribute purposes to him
without inquiring into teleology as such.
Furthermore, the thesis about divine teleology does not imply that there is any
interplay between teleology and mechanism. Yet Leibniz often commits himself to
there being such an interplay; that creates the problems that I want to address; and
Leibniz’s ﬁrst answer to my question brings no grist to that mill.
Second, teleological notions belong in biology, Leibniz holds. I have quoted
him saying that mechanism covers all of biology ‘‘except the initial formation’’ of
plants and animals. Given that an organism exists, its life and procreation can be
mechanistically explained, he seems to say, but the fact of its existence—the fact of
those particles’ being interrelated like that—can be explained only through God’s
purposes. I do not know how serious he was in this retreat from his usual doctrine
that mechanism can explain every material event. It grates against several things in
his philosophy; and I have found it only once in his writings, whereas the contrary
view that mechanism covers everything is ubiquitous. For example, he hopes to
reconcile ‘‘those who hope to explain mechanically the formation of the ﬁrst tissue

Leibniz’s Two Realms

137

of an animal and the whole machinery of its parts, with those who account for this
same structure using ﬁnal causes,’’ and says that ‘‘both ways are good’’ (DM 22/
WFPT 75).
Anyway, insofar as Leibniz admits teleology in the ‘‘except the initial formation’’ manner, he again provides me with nothing to discuss. In postulating a
ﬁnal-cause explanation for an event that cannot be explained in terms of efﬁcient
quasi-causes, Leibniz does not imply that the two sorts of explanation intersect in a
manner that we should inquire into.
Final causes more often enter his biology through the concept of function.
He writes, against Descartes, that biological structures give us evidence about
God’s purposes: ‘‘The reasons for what was created by an understanding are the
ﬁnal causes or plans of the understanding that made them. These are apparent
in their use and function, which is why considering the use parts have is so helpful
in anatomy’’ (G 4:299/AG 242).
The core of the concept of biological function was made clear in Wright
(1976); critics have picked away around the edges, but the main idea is clearly
correct. To say that the function of (C) the contraction of subcutaneous capillaries
when the skin cools is to produce (R) a reduction in heat-loss is to say:
1. C leads to R.
2. It is because C leads to R that the organism is so structured that C
occurs.

In most cases, clause 2 is true for evolutionary reasons: the structures producing C
have been selected for because they lead to R. There is nothing properly teleological about this; see Bennett (1976: 78–80) for a defense of that.
However, Leibniz would have to support the concept of function differently.
For him, as we have just seen, clause 2 is true because of God’s purposes (see for
instance DM 22/WFPT 74–75), and of course purposes do bring in genuine teleology. But in this context as in others, Leibniz is not philosophically curious about
the concept of teleology as applied to God; nor does he carefully explore the
question of how these purposes of God make themselves felt in a material world
wholly governed by mechanism.
Third, Leibniz deploys notions that he takes to be teleological in the thick
of doing inorganic physics, and not merely in reﬂecting on why its basic principles
are true. Although ‘‘the [mechanistic] way of efﬁcient causes is deeper and in some
sense more immediate and a priori,’’2 nevertheless ‘‘[t]he way of ﬁnal causes
is . . . frequently of use in discovering important and useful truths which it would take
a long time to ﬁnd by the other, more physical route’’ (DM 22/WFPT 75; see also SD,
GM 6:243/WFPT 163–164). Although he says ‘‘frequently,’’ Leibniz seems to have
only one example of this; it is the only one he cites, and he cites it often. It is Snell’s
law, which relates the angles of incidence and of refraction whenever light passes
between two translucent mediums. Leibniz takes this to imply that the light always follows the ‘‘easiest,’’ or anyway the most determinate, way to pass from a given
point in one medium to a given point in the other (TA, G 7:273/L 479). I shall go
along with this, on the strength less of his obscure explanation than that of Feynman,
Leighton, and Sands (1963: chap. 26.4).

138 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Snell offered his law in an essay that does not survive and that Leibniz did not
see. The law was ﬁrst published by Descartes, who sought to derive it mechanistically from an opaque mélange of points, principles, and models. Leibniz published a supposed demonstration that the law could be reached by asking what he
took to be a teleological or ﬁnal-cause question, namely ‘‘What path for a light ray
would be the easiest to get from A to B?’’ He conjectured that Snell did reach it in
that way, and that Descartes had not discovered it for himself but merely took it
from Snell. Of Descartes’ explanation of the law he writes:
It is extremely forced and too hard to understand. . . . It is an afterthought adjusted
somehow to the conclusion, and not discovered by the method he gives. So we
may well believe that we should not have had this beautiful discovery so soon
without the method of ﬁnal causes. (TA, G 7:274/L 480; see also DM 22/WFPT 75)

This does not repeat the old point that patterns in nature bring in teleology
through the thought that God purposefully instituted them. Rather, Leibniz is now
saying that some of the patterns are teleological, so that one might be helped to
discover them by asking teleological questions.
Granted that Leibniz’s easiest-path formulation accurately expresses Snell’s
law, why call it teleological? Most writers in this area take Leibniz’s word for it, but
he and they are wrong. Of course we can talk about God’s wanting the light to
follow the easiest path; but so we can about any physical law. ‘‘Newton’s gravitational law reﬂects God’s desire that the relative acceleration between two otherwise
isolated bodies should vary inversely with the square of the distance between
them.’’ No one who had worked on teleological concepts per se would count
Snell’s law as teleological.
If it is so, then Leibniz ought to explain how events in a mechanistically patterned material world can be revealed by asking teleological questions. He does not
try to.

Teleology within the Individual Monad
Fourth, Leibniz claims to build teleology into his ground-ﬂoor metaphysic of monads: There are only monads, and in them there is only perception and appetite. The
word ‘appetite’ implies a claim to teleology, which is reinforced by much that
Leibniz writes, including: ‘‘The laws of appetites [are] the laws of the ﬁnal causes of
good and evil’’ (PNG 3/WFPT 259).
The basic account of appetite is straightforward. Whereas a perception is a
short-lived intrinsic state of the monad, an appetite is the monad’s endogenous
change from one state to another: ‘‘The action of the internal principle which
brings about change, or the passage from one perception to another, can be called
appetition’’ (Mon 15/WFPT 269). In the case of humans, Leibniz writes to Remond, ‘‘appetite is called will’’ (G 3:622), which repeats the teleological claim.
Momentary states of a monad correlate with the rest of the universe in such a
way as to carry information about it; and that thesis, which lies deep in Leibniz’s
metaphysic, gives color to calling such states ‘‘perceptions.’’ Nothing comparable

Leibniz’s Two Realms

139

supports designating as ‘‘appetition’’ a monad’s change of state. Such changes are
caused from within the monad; and that is a point they have in common with
voluntary action, which we ordinarily think of as endogenous rather than forced
from without. But that is a thin likeness. Unlike our ordinary voluntary/involuntary
concept, this one draws no line through the monad’s life, because according to
Leibniz every monadic change is caused from within.
Furthermore, an account of the will should provide for attempts that fail, as
when one tries and fails to meditate on God or to stop thinking about Istanbul.
Leibniz offers to provide for that, through the notion of tendency. Sometimes he
says that appetitions are tendencies (PNG 2/WFPT 259), but all he needs here is
his more usual view that an appetition involves or manifests a tendency:
The action of the internal principle which brings about the change or passage
from one perception to another can be called appetition; it is true that the appetite
cannot always completely reach the whole perception toward which it tends, but it
always obtains some part of it, and reaches new perceptions. (Mon 15/WFPT 269)

So an appetite may tend toward something without reaching it. The only clear
examples I can ﬁnd of unrealized tendencies involve a thing’s tending to become F
but not doing so because of some fact about its environment; but the tendencies of
Leibniz’s monads cannot be like that, because they are perfectly self-contained,
never acted on from outside.
Even if he can overcome that difﬁculty, Leibniz’s account of monadic appetite
does not justify his redescriptions of it in such teleological terms as ‘ﬁnal causes’
and ‘ends and means.’ His fundamental theory says only that the individual monad
runs through its history in accordance with laws given to it by God, laws that
govern the efﬁcient causality of its unfolding. I agree with Robert Adams:
The language of ‘appetite’ and ‘ends and means’ may be somewhat misleading. It
suggests the pursuit of a desired future state of affairs, but the action of a Leibnizian substantial form is more like what is sometimes called ‘acting on principle.’
In Leibniz’s view, the ‘‘internal principle’’ governing ‘‘the passage [of a substance]
from one perception to another’’ is not based on the desirability of the later
perception in itself, but rather on the following of certain laws of nature. (Adams
1994: 318)

There seems to be no followable route from Leibniz’s basic metaphysic to the
notion of doing something for the sake of an end, let alone the more fully teleological notion of doing something because one thinks it will lead to a certain end.
Writing informally about the human condition, Leibniz makes free with intentions and purposes; but when his metaphysic is close at hand he has little to say
about teleology except for the blank assertion that ﬁnal causes reign within the
monad because of appetition. The only passage I can ﬁnd that puts a little ﬂesh on
those bones is this strange one:
since the nature of a simple substance consists of perception and appetite, it is
clear that there is in each soul a series of appetites and perceptions, through which
it is led from the end to the means, from the perception of one object to the
perception of another. (C 14/MP 175)

140 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

The monad, we are told here, is led ‘‘from the end to the means,’’ a ﬁne ad media.
That seems to imply that appetition involves genuine teleology, in which ends, or
anyway thoughts of them, help to explain means. If that were Leibniz’s point,
something would be seriously wrong. In his metaphysic the move from one perception to the next is a matter of efﬁcient causation; if it were also a move from end
to means, that would subject teleology to Spinoza’s jibe that it absurdly ‘‘reverses the
order of nature,’’ treating effects as causes. Of course Spinoza was wrong about that:
in treating ends (or thoughts about them) as explanatory, teleology does not treat
effects as causes; it does not imply that when I stretch out to pluck the apple from
the tree, the plucking causes the stretching. Yet that is what Leibniz commits
himself to if he holds that the efﬁcient-causal move from one perception to the next
involves going ‘‘from the end to the means.’’ I hope that it was a slip of the pen,
although ‘‘through which it is led from the means to the end’’ would hardly have
been better.
Adams’s criticism and mine rest on our seeing Leibniz as a thoroughly bottomup philosopher, not a partly top-down one. Leibniz’s theory-building proceeds in a
strictly upward direction: he aims to develop his metaphysic in an austere way,
allowing himself the concepts of logic and mathematics, and those of substance,
quality, time, correlation and little else, not availing himself of concepts from folk
psychology with no warrant except their familiarity. For him, I contend, our psychological concepts are to be clariﬁed and justiﬁed by being developed out of the
parsimonious initial stock of concepts. A partly top-down project would allow him
to import into his monadic metaphysic concepts taken unanalyzed from armchair
psychology. Then he might explain appetition partly through the idea that such
changes have something volitional or purposive about them—with those concepts
being taken on board, unexplained, on the strength of their quotidian familiarity
to us. That would get him out of trouble that he otherwise has, but at a high price
in philosophical interest. Leibniz’s actual bottom-up project is potentially illuminating because when we see a great philosopher try to make bricks without straw, we
can learn something about the right way to make bricks.

Two Realms
Let us now join Leibniz in supposing that he has established teleology in the
individual monad, and examine what structure he erects on that foundation.
According to Leibniz, an organism is an inﬁnitely complex machine associated
in a special way with a single monad, its mind. Although he sometimes writes as
though he were a realist about the material machine, his real view is that it is the
appearance to us of an aggregate of monads. Its mind, on the other hand, can only be
thought of as a single monad, and thus ultimately real in Leibniz’s metaphysic. So
when he contemplates an animal, Leibniz is attending at once to phenomenal
matter and to a real monad. He holds that the former should be intellectually
handled purely in terms of efﬁcient quasi-causes or mechanism, the latter partly in
terms of ﬁnal causes or teleology:

Leibniz’s Two Realms

141

Souls act according to the laws of ﬁnal causes, through appetition, ends and
means. Bodies act according to the laws of efﬁcient causes, or of motions. And the
two realms [règnes], that of efﬁcient causes and that of ﬁnal causes, are in mutual
harmony. (Mon 79/WFPT 279)

This two-realms doctrine, asserting the harmony of the mechanistic and teleological orders, is my topic in this and the next three sections.
The ﬁnal/efﬁcient duality of realms risks being muddled with two other
dualities. Each muddle is hinted at in a passage where Leibniz writes of the two
realms:
These realms are governed each by its own law, with no confusion between them,
and the cause of perception and appetite is no more to be sought in the modes of
extension than is the cause of nutrition and other organic functions to be sought in
the forms or souls. (CT, G 4:391/L 409–410)

Of course perception and appetite, being properties of monads, could not be causally
explained in terms of ‘‘modes of extension,’’ that is, of phenomena rather than basic
reality. So they lie outside the range of ‘‘mechanism’’ when this is understood as the
physics of bodily collisions. But the duality we are tracking is that of
(1) efﬁcient causality and ﬁnal causality,

not that of
(2) impact mechanics and something else.

The monadic status of perception and appetite does automatically put them on the
right in contrast (2), but not in (1), which is my topic. On the face of it, as Adams
pointed out, the causality within the monad belongs on the left of (1).
The other possible muddle is the confusion of (1) with the duality of
(3) necessity and freedom.

There are hints of that in the passage from which I have been quoting. Just before
the bit last quoted, Leibniz writes: ‘‘Nature has, as it were, a dominion within a
dominion, a double realm [regnum] of reason and necessity—that is, of forms and
of material particles’’ (CT, G 4:391/L 409–410). The phrase ‘reason and necessity’
hints at (3): Leibniz does sometimes connect reason with freedom, and the link
between ‘necessity’ and (3) is obvious.
Less obvious, but perhaps more potent, are the implications of the phrase ‘‘a
dominion within a dominion’’ (imperium in imperio). Spinoza had used this very
phrase to characterize a supposed error: ‘‘They seem to conceive man in nature as
imperium in imperio. For they believe that man disturbs rather than follows the order
of nature’’ (Ethics IIIPreface/CWS 491). Now, Spinoza was defending (3) determinism against radical freedom, rather than (1) mechanism against teleology; but I
don’t doubt that Leibniz steered for this collision, and his doing so suggests that he
was at risk of collating (1) with (3).

142 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Are these two dualisms different? Well, on most reasonable understandings of
what freedom is, it involves teleology. But the two are not equivalent: we have a
clear enough idea of a creature that acts in accordance with what it believes will
achieve certain goals, but which is utterly in thrall to its goals, having nothing that
we could recognize as freedom. It is confusing, to say the least, for the realm of
teleology to be labeled as the realm of freedom.
Furthermore, for Leibniz as for many others, the freedom question is tangled
with issues about the scope of deterministic causation, the latter being pointed to by
his reference to reason and ‘‘necessity.’’ When ‘‘freedom’’ is looked at in this way,
teleology is not necessary for it. Leibniz speaks of God (and sometimes even of
humans, alas) as acting from sources that ‘‘incline but do not necessitate.’’ This
offers freedom of a kind, but through a weakened, nondeterministic, efﬁcient
causality; it has nothing to do with teleology.

Hidden Harmony between the Two Realms
Accepting for discussion’s sake that each monad has a teleological aspect, let us
now ask: Does that mental teleology relate to the material organism in such a way
that it too can be characterized in teleological terms?
If Leibniz said no, he would be drawing a picture in which mental teleology
does not spread to the material organism: the mind’s wants and goals have no
bearing on the physical behavior of the organism. Either the mind cares only about
itself, or it cares about the body too, and is nearly always frustrated. This repellent
scene is not Leibniz’s. An ensouled animal (which he here calls a ‘‘corporeal
substance’’) belongs to both realms, he says. Their laws are very different, he continues, but God ‘‘brings it about . . . that two very different series in the same corporeal substance respond to each other and perfectly harmonize with each other’’
(CT, G 4:391/L 410). This harmony is between teleological events in the mind and
mechanistic ones in the body. Leibniz is plainly paving the way for the mind’s
appetitions to have something to do with what happens in the body; presumably
wanting to provide a metaphysical underlay for common beliefs about how goals
and purposes are exhibited in behavior. How, then, are the two series harmonized?
With what speciﬁc relation do we cash in ‘‘have something to do with’’?
Leibniz gives one answer when he relates appetitive events to bodily ones
through his general view that all events in one’s mind closely mirror events in one’s
body. He usually states this in terms of perceptions or sensations:
It is thoroughly reasonable that the effect should correspond to the cause; and how
could one ever be sure that it does not, since we have no distinct knowledge either
of the sensation of blue (for instance) or of the motions which produce it? It is true
that pain does not resemble the movement of a pin; but it might thoroughly
resemble the motions which the pin causes in our body, and might represent them
in the soul; and I have not the least doubt that it does. (RB 131–132)

So far as this concerns color sensations, it has turned out to be right (Hardin 1988: 133).
To speculate that it holds for all sensations of whatever kind, however, is bold indeed.

Leibniz’s Two Realms

143

Leibniz goes further still. He applies the thesis to our conative as well as to
our cognitive and sensory states, and to regular accompaniments that are not
even quasi-causes; and that yields an answer of a sort to my question about how
mind ‘‘harmonizes’’ with body. Here is the clearest statement of it that I have
found:
There is an inﬁnity of shapes and motions, present and past, which play a part in
the efﬁcient cause of my present writing; and there is an inﬁnity of tiny inclinations and dispositions of my soul, present and past, which play a part in its ﬁnal
cause. (Mon 36/WFPT 272–273)3

This conjectures that the ﬂurry of submicroscopic material events leading to my
hand’s going up is mirrored by a dense cloud of mostly unconscious conative
items—pros and cons, inclinations of my soul—whose resultant is that I choose to
raise my hand.
That is too wildly speculative to be a soberly interesting suggestion for how the
two realms might harmonize. Anyway, it does not yield the kind of harmony that
I am inquiring after. What Leibniz ought to want, and what his rhetoric seems to
promise, is a metaphysic that underpins our ordinary common-sense attributions of
goals, wants, and so on to human and other animals. The teleology that we are
supposing to reside in the animal’s ‘‘dominant’’ monad ought to harmonize not
with the neural goings-on in my body but with my observable behavior. That is the
need that Leibniz should try to meet.

Teleological Patterns in Behavior
Anything like a credible solution to this problem must avail itself of the idea of a
teleological pattern in an animal’s behavior. As a ﬁrst approximation, we can say
that that is a pattern that makes the behavior at least prima facie a candidate for
being brought under teleological concepts. Then the thesis of two harmonized
realms will say that the real teleology that (we are supposing) is present in the
appetitions of an animal’s mind or dominant monad matches the teleological
patterns in its behavior. In a nutshell: its behavior will prima facie support the
attribution to it of food as a goal when and only when its mind is the subject of a
desire for food, an intention to get food, or the like. I have not found Leibniz
writing explicitly about teleological patterns in animal behavior; but they have to
be part of any story that captures our ordinary beliefs and assumptions about the
goals and purposes of animals, including ourselves.
Teleological patterns would not be needed if we settled for point-blank teleology. This involves the simplest possible relation of wants to movements: when an
animal’s body undergoes a turn of the head or an opening of the mouth, pointblank teleology says that the animal wanted or intended to make that very movement. End of story. That is too ﬂat and featureless to be of any use. One mark of its
degeneracy is that although it would provide ‘‘explanations’’ of a sort—‘‘Why did
he jump?’’ ‘‘Because he wanted to’’—it would not yield even the beginnings of a
hint of a tentative prediction.

144 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

A teleology worth having must be not point-blank but long-distance, providing
for the idea that the animal moves thus in order to bring about some later state
of affairs. For point-blank teleology, we have only to look to the given animal
movement; it is automatic and easy. Long-distance teleology, however, requires us
to pair a movement with some subsequent possible state of affairs; and to select the
latter we need rules, criteria, principles, general theory. These will serve to delineate the teleological patterns in the behavior.
In sketching these I shall borrow from previous publications of mine, but I
do not claim ownership. The central ideas inform the work of most competent
workers in this ﬁeld today, though I have laid them out more explicitly than most
(Bennett 1976).
The needed principles rely on two ideas: that purposive behavior ordinarily
reﬂects character-traits, purposes that the animal often has; and that a fair amount
of purposive behavior succeeds. These two jointly yield the crucial notion of a
teleological pattern of the form:
For any action-kind A of which Animal is capable, whenever it is so situated that
performing an A will lead to G, Animal performs the A.4

If Animal is so placed that digging would bring it food, it digs; if swimming would
bring it food, it swims; if jumping would bring it food, it jumps. That prima facie
qualiﬁes Animal to count as a food-seeker. For a given animal there is a teleological pattern for each relevant value of G.
For this to be realistic, the generalizations deﬁning the patterns must be
weakened, to allow for nonperformance because of competing goals, physical
incapacity, satiety, and so on. Also, provision must be made for failures. These are
ignored by the formula I have offered, which says that Animal does A whenever
doing A would lead to G. The remedy for this also repairs another ﬂaw in the
account as so far given.
The remedy is to change the teleological patterns from ‘‘. . . whenever performing an A will lead to G . . .’’ to ‘‘. . . whenever Animal thinks that performing an
A will lead to G . . .’’ That allows for failure resulting from error about means and
ends. It also heads off the complaint that it would be miraculous if Animal’s
behavior were to depend on how it is situated rather than on how it thinks it is
situated. (Leibniz would agree; see NI, G 4:505/WFPT 211.)
Other ﬁne-tuning is also needed, but this is not the place to go into all the
details.
That is what Leibniz needs if he is to round out his account of human
teleology. In the ‘‘realm’’ of the organic machine there will be events that fall
under teleological patterns of something like the kind I have sketched; in the
‘‘realm’’ of the dominant monad there will be corresponding appetitions. I have
not found Leibniz explicitly laying out anything like the concept of teleological
pattern that I have sketched. But there is no obstacle to his having it, and it is
at least hinted at in things he writes, such as: ‘‘Volition is the effort or endeavour
(conatus) to move towards what one ﬁnds good and away from what one ﬁnds bad,
the endeavour arising immediately out of one’s awareness of those things’’ (RB
172). This, however, needs work. A teleological scheme in which the central idea is

Leibniz’s Two Realms

145

that Animal tries to do what it ﬁnds good is close to vacuous; it needs to be
replaced, for each individual animal, by something that says what the animal
‘‘ﬁnds good’’; which is what my teleological patterns do.

Harmonizing Teleology with Mechanism
Given teleological patterns in an animal’s behavior, and wanting to use them in
explanations, what are we to do about the mechanistic explanations that we think
are always appropriate? This is the problem of how to harmonize the teleological
and mechanistic realms without letting the former carve off for itself any of the
territory that would otherwise belong to the latter. It confronts all of us who think
that teleological explanations can be legitimate although every event can be explained mechanistically.
The best and probably only solution for it has informed the work of various
philosophers for several decades, most notably that of Daniel Dennett, though I
may have done most to make it explicit (in Bennett 1976: 72–78). Its crux is the idea
that a teleological pattern, although each instance of it can be explained mechanistically, may not correspond to a single mechanistic explanation.
For any value of A within the repertoire of this thermostat, whenever its doing
A would bring the room’s temperature nearer to 68 degrees, it does A; yet we do not
credit it with having a 68-degree room as a goal. What justiﬁes our reluctance? The
obvious answer, ‘‘It is an artifact, and so not alive, and so does not have goals,’’ goes
too fast and throws no light. A better answer says that we do not attribute a thermal
goal to the thermostat because the entire range of its behavior falling under the
teleological pattern admits of a single mechanistic explanation: the gap between its
temperature and 68 degrees causes a strip of metal to expand or contract, that
opens or closes a switch, and that controls the ﬂow of electricity which controls the
temperature. That covers the entire teleological pattern. Because the teleological
account of the thermostat’s pattern of behavior is matched by a single mechanistic
account, the latter should prevail and we should reject the former as having no
honest work to do (Taylor 1964: 29).
Now consider an animal with a large repertoire of food-seeking behaviors,
triggered by a range of different sensory clues: various sounds, smells, and sights lead
it to dig, swim, run, climb, and so on. Each episode can be explained mechanistically in terms of how sensory inputs stimulate nerves, and how neural outputs
make muscles contract; but the episodes employ different mechanisms; no unitary
mechanism covers the whole range of them. So the teleological explanation in
terms of food-seeking provides a grouping of episodes—a way of understanding the
animal—that no mechanistic explanation delivers, and our concerns and interests
may make that of value to us. Complete knowledge of the whole mechanism for
each episode, even if we had it, would not exhibit the pattern that the teleological
explanation yields; so the latter earns its keep by doing work that mechanism cannot
do. For more about this, see Bennett 1976: 72–78; Dennett 1989.
I cannot see any obstacle to Leibniz’s having these thoughts, and accepting them. Indeed, a unitary teleological pattern arising out of a swirling cloud of

146 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

different mechanistic ones should strike him as a ﬁne example of the kind of
‘‘harmony’’ that God in his greatness can achieve. But I have no evidence of
Leibniz’s thinking any of this. The little he says on the harmonizing of the two
realms is strikingly perfunctory, and is always based on the assumption that the
teleological realm is mental and the mechanistic physical. This is typical: ‘‘It is not
only the voluntary inner acts of our minds which follow from this conatus, but
outer ones as well, i.e. voluntary movements of our bodies, thanks to the union of
body and soul which I have explained elsewhere’’ (RB 173).
How did we get into this situation? Leibniz was offering to harmonize mental
teleology with the material behavior of animals (including humans); I said that for
that we needed to know what sort of physical behavior is involved; and in developing that story I seem to have provided a sufﬁcient basis for teleological concepts
in animal behavior considered on its own, without bringing mental appetitions in
at all. I did bring in what the animal believes; but the account could be developed
in such a way as to extrude even that mental element; and in any case that is (in
Leibniz’s terms) an appeal to the monad’s perceptions but not to its appetitions.
What has happened?
I cannot draw any interesting moral from this situation. It seems to me that
Leibniz simply did not think hard about the essentially explanatory nature of teleological concepts. He had presumably some notion of the kind of behavior that could
plausibly be handled teleologically—behavior falling into teleological patterns—
and thought of instances of such patterns as merely accompanied by corresponding
appetitions in the dominant monad. That is a plausible enough position. Someone
who looked at a thorough account of animal teleology of the sort I have been
sketching, and saw that it could draw the needed distinctions, yield the wanted
predictions and explanations, and so on, might still think that something is missing.
‘‘For an animal’s movement to be explained by its having a certain goal,’’ he might
say, ‘‘there must be an internally felt wanting or intending. The story you have told
lacks the experienced heart of teleology, which resides in the mind and not in
behavioral patterns.’’ We can see Leibniz’s two-realms story as an attempt to give that
objector what he wants. It is a prima facie reasonable thing to want to do; but we
should bear in mind that while it aims to supply teleology with its felt, experienced,
inward aspect, it contributes nothing to its workings.

Teleology as Explanatory
I now confess to a major gap in the teleological story that I have told; and I need
to investigate whether monadic appetitions could ﬁll it. As I have just implied,
teleological concepts are nothing unless they are explanatory: identifying an animal’s goals is essentially a matter of discovering certain explanations for some of its
behavior. Attempts to identify goals in a spirit of mere description, with explanation
perhaps coming later, have always come to grief. (For some details see Bennett 1976:
42–46.) So far, I have provided nothing to secure that the patterns are explanatory
rather than coincidental. Given that Animal conforms to a mouse-catching pattern,
we shan’t attribute to it the goal of catching mice unless we think that on most

Leibniz’s Two Realms

147

occasions when it does what it thinks will give it a mouse it does so because it has
that thought. The mere existence of that pattern is not enough; there must be
something about it that makes it explanatory. (The account I gave in Bennett 1976
did not meet this requirement. I remedied the omission in Bennett 1991a, b.)
One might think that monadic appetitions can enter at this point, playing a
working role: ‘‘Leibniz can say that what makes it legitimate to explain the animal’s
movements in terms of a mouse-catching goal is the existence at the same time of a
toward-mouse-catching appetition in its dominant monad.’’ It is not clear how that
would work. For the pattern to have explanatory force, one would have thought, is
for it to be more than merely coincidental; and it is not clear how that is headed off
by the existence of a certain mental event each time the pattern is instantiate. It
might be different if the appetition functioned as the cause of the behavior; then
the pattern would drop out of the picture, for the behavior would be causally
explained purely by the occurrence of the appetition. But Leibniz will not say that,
for it involves transeunt causation, which he ﬁrmly and deeply denies; and it
involves giving a material event an explanation that supplants any mechanistic one,
which he comprehensively condemns.
What does solve the present problem has nothing to do with mentality. What
is to be ruled out is the possibility that it is a sheer coincidence that this animal
houses a multitude of mechanisms that jointly make it a mouse-getter. For the
behavior caused by those mechanisms to be appropriately explained in terms of
mouse-seeking, it must be the case that the animal contains that package of
mechanisms because it has the overall effect of making the animal a mouse-getter.
That could be the case for any of three reasons. (1) God’s purpose in building
that package of mechanisms into the animal was to make it a mouse-getter. (2) The
animal contains that package of mechanisms because they were evolutionarily
selected for; their effect of making their owners mouse-getters was selected for. (3)
The individual animal has assembled that package within itself through a process
of learning what clues indicate mice and what behavior leads to catching them.
I believe that (2) and (3) cover the ground. Leibniz, having not heard of (2)
and being a theist, could and presumably would think that (1) and (3) between
them exhaust the cases. That, so far as I can see, would not set up any special
strains within his overall philosophy; but would still leave appetites idle.

Locke’s Theories of Motivation
Leibniz apparently offers to provide for the conative side of the human condition
by appetitions. I have argued that their teleological nature is dubious at best; the
shape of their ﬁt to bodily behavior is seriously underdescribed; and they are given
no proper explanatory role.
These deﬁcits show up when in the New Essays Leibniz writes about the
conative, motivational side of the human condition, doing so more fully and freely
(I think) than anywhere else in his work. The prompt for this is the treatment of
motivation in Locke’s Essay 2.21. Leibniz’s comments on this material are lively,
energetic, and supremely intelligent; they are also friendly and collaborative, as

148

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

beﬁts his judgment that Locke here ‘‘makes especially evident the depth and penetration of his mind’’ (RB 164). Furthermore, they tap into Leibniz’s benevolence
and decency: his interest in issues about motivation is energized by their bearing on
people’s moral well-being (see RB 191).
Leibniz is here focusing sharply, intensely, and with moral concern on the
voluntary behavior of humans, putting himself under pressure to do the best he can
to get straight about this matter. We shall ﬁnd that these heartfelt pages draw no
sustenance from his metaphysical doctrines—of monadic teleology and of the ‘‘two
realms’’—and indeed that the pressure of what he wants to say drives him ever
further away from those doctrines. He employs the key term ‘appetition,’ but the
deeper he gets into his topic the less teleological appetitions become. Eventually,
they have nothing to do with forethought, purposes, intentions, or the like; Leibniz
explicitly divorces them from all that, which he hands over to a different faculty—
reason. Properly to present all this, I must set the scene.
Locke ﬁrst held that a person always acts for what he thinks to be his own
good, so that self-harming behavior always involves ignorance or error about
consequences.5 He rightly came to doubt this, and offered a second theory that
expands on the ﬁrst by postulating a mediating link in the causal chain from valuejudgments to volitions:
Good and evil, present and absent, ’tis true, work on the mind. But that which
immediately determines the will from time to time in every voluntary action is the
uneasiness of desire ﬁxed on some absent good. (Essay 2.21.33)

To the thesis that A judgment about comparative good causes an act of the will,
Locke now adds the further detail that It does so through an intermediate item, a
state of uneasiness. Uneasiness acts reliably on the will, he holds, but the power of
value-judgments to cause it is an unsteady affair. Someone who is sure that fornicating will bring him some transient pleasure yet cost him an extra decade in
Purgatory may nevertheless proceed with his sexual adventure because the thought
of that decade makes him less uneasy than does the thought of remaining chaste.
Thus, akrasia does not have to be explained in terms of error about consequences.
Locke regards his uneasiness theory as virtually standing to reason: ‘‘When a
man is perfectly content with the state he is in, which is when he is perfectly without
any uneasiness, what industry, what action, what will is there left but to continue
in it?’’ (2.21.34). My trying to bring about some state of affairs S is intelligible (he
argues) only if I am dissatisﬁed with the present non-S state of the world. My
awareness that the nonobtaining of S is unsatisfactory to me is my uneasiness—my
sense of something wrong—and in acting I attempt to cure it by making S obtain.
This was a mistake on Locke’s part. It is simply not true that voluntary action is
intelligible only as an attempt to improve on the present. Purposive action involves
comparing a possible future not with the present but with other possible futures. (I
have not been convinced by the defense of Locke and Leibniz against this criticism
by Vailati 1990: 214–216.)
This error of Locke’s is repeated, more subtly but quite deﬁnitely, in Leibniz’s
commentary on him. His account of human activity is permeated by the Lockean
idea that voluntary behavior is always remedial, always directed toward putting us

Leibniz’s Two Realms

149

at our ease. We shall see this helping him to move away from real long-term
teleology toward a mere itch-scratching that is not clearly teleological.

Leibniz’s Response to Locke’s Theories
Though he thinks that Locke dismisses his ﬁrst theory too briskly, Leibniz agrees
with the second: something like uneasiness mediates between value judgments and
the will. But there is a difference. Where Locke thinks of episodes of uneasiness
as fully present to consciousness, Leibniz says that they may be barely noticeable or
even lie below the threshold of awareness. I shall use ‘‘disquiet’’ for the phenomenon Leibniz is talking about; he calls it inquiétude, which Coste had used to render
Locke’s ‘‘uneasiness,’’ but Leibniz says that that was a bad translation.
Leibnizian disquiet, because it can be subliminal, plays a very different role
from the one that Locke assigns to uneasiness. In the preceding chapter, before Locke
has come to his theories of motivation, Leibniz ushers in disquiet, which he describes
as ‘‘imperceptible little urges which keep us constantly in suspense.’’ (The implication that episodes of disquiet are all ‘‘imperceptible’’ is not his usual view about
them.) He further characterizes the ‘‘little urges’’ or ‘‘disquiets’’ thus:
These impulses are like so many little springs trying to unwind and so driving our
machine along. . . . That is why we are never indifferent, even when we appear to
be most so, as for instance over whether to turn left or right at the end of a lane.
For the choice that we make arises from these insensible stimuli, which, mingled
with the actions of objects and of our bodily interiors, make us ﬁnd one direction
of movement more comfortable than the other. (RB 166)

This aims to unify the entire range of human behavior—from your deliberated
career choice right down to your crossing your legs without thinking about it. Here as
elsewhere Leibniz gets long mileage out of his view that some mental states lie below
the threshold of awareness.
But there is trouble. In the next chapter Leibniz will openly identify the episodes of disquiet, the ‘‘impulses,’’ with appetitions (RB 190); those are features of
monads, so that ‘‘these insensible stimuli’’ should belong to the mentalistic part of
the story he is telling. Yet he speaks of them as ‘‘mingling’’ with bodily events: at the
end of the lane I turn left because of insensible mental stimuli mingled with a slight
breeze blowing that way and a faint pain in one knee. I cannot see what sort of
‘‘mingling’’ this could be, consistent with Leibniz’s metaphysic.
A worse trouble, alluded to earlier, is that the picture Leibniz is drawing here
does not seem teleological; it is too much like mere itch-scratching. That is even
more true of what he writes next:
In German, the word for the balance of a clock is Unruhe—which also means
disquiet; and one can take that for a model of how it is in our bodies, which can
never be perfectly at their ease. For if one’s body were at ease, some new [event]
would at once alter the balance and compel those parts of the body to exert some
tiny effort to get back into the best state possible; with the result that there is a
perpetual conﬂict which makes up, so to speak, the disquiet of our clock. (RB 166)

150 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

This charming passage has nothing teleological about it. But then it is explicitly about
‘‘the body’’; so one might think that Leibniz means here to be writing about only one
of the two realms. But not so. In the following chapter, NE 2.21, Leibniz openly
identiﬁes disquiets with appetitions, and says that they ‘‘stimulate the will’’ (RB 189).
All of this, then, falls within the ambit of the ‘‘two realms’’ doctrine, and ought
to be anchored in Leibniz’s basic metaphysic of teleology. However, it is not. That
metaphysic says that each monad falls within a realm of ﬁnal causes, but all
Leibniz is offering us here are spurs, springs, imbalances—efﬁcient causes. Here is
the climax:
These appetitions, whether small or large . . . are truly the ﬁrst steps that nature makes
us take; not so much towards happiness as towards joy, since in them one looks only
to the present, but experience and reason teach us to govern and moderate them so
that they can lead us to happiness. . . . Appetitions are like a stone’s endeavour to
follow the shortest but not always the best route to the centre of the earth; it cannot
foresee that it will collide with rocks on which it will shatter, whereas it would have
got closer to its goal if it had had the wit and the means to swerve aside. In the same
way, by rushing straight at a present pleasure we sometimes fall into the abyss of
misery. That is why reason opposes appetition with images of greater goods or evils to
come, and with a ﬁrm policy and practice of thinking before acting and then standing
by whatever is found to be best. . . . (RB 189)

Although twenty pages earlier Leibniz seemed to make disquiet drive the whole
range of human motivation, he now assigns the ‘‘spurs’’ and appetitions to the
stupid, obsessed, thoughtless part of our conative nature. In fact, he has been
implicitly doing this all through, but now it comes to the surface because the
spurs—now openly called ‘‘appetitions’’—are contrasted with another element in
the human condition, namely ‘‘reason.’’ Whereas in appetition ‘‘one looks only to
the present,’’ reason brings a concern for what is ‘‘to come’’: reason is forwardlooking, and able to control appetitions, redirecting them and perhaps lessening
their force. The teleological load in Leibniz’s account of the human condition, we
now ﬁnd, is carried purely by ‘‘reason.’’ Let us see whether Leibniz has prepared
reason for this task, and what task it is. I give these a section apiece.

The Place of Reason in Leibniz’s Metaphysic
Whereas all monads have appetite, in Leibniz’s scheme of things, only high-grade
ones have reason. Those high-grade monads are marked off by having more distinct
perceptions than do the rest: more of their perceptions are distinct, or their perceptions are on average more distinct, or . . . It seems that Leibniz never ﬁne-tunes
this doctrine, but always leaves it vague: ‘‘Monads . . . are limited and differentiated
by their level of distinct perception’’ (Mon 60). Nor does he explain in fundamental terms what the distinctness of a perception consists in. The best attempt I
know to ﬁll this gap for him is Brandom (1981), and even that is open to question
(see Bennett 2001: sec. 125). Having noted these two lacunae, let us press on: let
us take it that Leibniz selects a subset of monads in terms of something called
distinctness of perceptions, and see what he does with that.

Leibniz’s Two Realms

151

He thinks it is the source of three other differences. High-grade monads differ
from the rest, he maintains, in having (1) memory, (2) (more) awareness of their
own states,6 and (3) reason.
(1) Leibniz holds that every monad at every moment contains traces from which
its whole past could in principle be read off; and to have a memory, properly so-called,
is to be reﬂectively aware of such a trace. The ‘‘insensible perceptions,’’ of which one
is not aware, merely ‘‘preserve the seeds of memory’’ (RB 239–240). So (1) memory is
drawn in by (2) reﬂective awareness, and does not need separate discussion.
(2) Leibniz sometimes ties our awareness to distinctness, writing that we are
unaware of many of our perceptions because they are not distinct enough. He links
this theme with his further thesis that perceptions may escape our notice or reﬂective awareness because they are ‘‘too minute’’ (RB 164), are ‘‘not forceful enough’’ (RB 54), go by too fast (see RB 403), or are too uniform:
There is in us an inﬁnity of perceptions, unaccompanied by awareness or reﬂection; that is, of alterations in the soul itself, of which we are unaware because
these impressions are either too minute and too numerous, or else too unvarying,
so that they are not sufﬁciently distinctive on their own. (RB 53)

So we have Leibniz maintaining that we are aware of our perceptions to the extent
that they are large or forceful, conspicuously varied, and fairly slow-changing. I do
not think that these three features deﬁne ‘distinct’ for him, but they accompany
distinctness; perceptions that lack them Leibniz often calls ‘‘confused.’’
(3) When he writes about reason as a faculty, Leibniz often calls it ‘‘intellect’’:
‘‘We should undertake the analysis of them . . . by reason in so far as they can be
made more capable of being treated by the intellect’’ (RB 120); ‘‘These depend
upon intellectual truths, grounded in reason’’ (RB 444). Also, he assigns to ‘‘intellect’’ matters such as the exploration of necessary truths, which he also assigns to
‘‘reason,’’ as in his reference to ‘‘[I]ntellectual ideas, from which necessary truths
arise’’ (RB 81). Now consider this:
We are aware of many things, within ourselves and around us, which we do
not understand; and we understand them when we have distinct ideas of them
accompanied by the power to reﬂect and to derive necessary truths from those
ideas . . . . ‘Understanding’ in my sense is what in Latin is called intellectus, and the
exercise of this faculty is called ‘intellection,’ which is a distinct perception
combined with a faculty of reﬂection, which the beasts do not have. Any perception which is combined with this faculty is a thought, and I do not allow
thought to beasts any more than I do understanding. So one can say that intellection occurs when the thought is distinct. (RB 173)

Any intellectual activity (reasoning) involves thoughts, and Leibniz says that to
have a thought is just to have a distinct perception and a reﬂective awareness of it.7
Analogously, to do carpentry one needs sharp tools and a good grip on them. Of
course there is more to carpentry than that; having ﬁrmly grasped a ﬁne chisel
one should then do something with it; and Leibniz presumably also held that
for reasoning or intellection one must operate in certain ways on the distinct
perceptions/ideas of which one is reﬂectively aware. But he does not say anything

152

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

about what those activities are—or, anyway, he does not relate them to the terms of
his basic metaphysic. I cannot ﬁnd him explaining why it is that the monads that
meet some standard of distinctness of perceptions are all and only the ones that
have reason.

Reason as Controller of Desire
What role does Leibniz assign to reason in the conative life of a thoughtful person?
Even if we cannot get from him a satisfactory rooting of the concept of reason in his
basic metaphysic, we can still ask this question about how he situates it in his
picture of the human condition. Such answers as I can ﬁnd come mostly from the
New Essays; I have found little in other works. It may be symptomatic that there is
no entry for ‘‘reason’’ in the indexes of AG, MP, Mates (1986), Wilson (1989), Ross
(1984), Jolley (1995), or Sleigh (1990). Adams (1994) and L have only four between
them, none relevant to my present topic.
The best I can offer are four ideas, of which two are little more than tentative
suggestions.
(1) Discussing ways of using some desires to block others, Leibniz writes that
without a certain technique one could not resist certain desires ‘‘in any free and
voluntary way in which reason could play a part’’ (RB 195). When he discusses how
we can do this, offering ‘‘methods and stratagems’’ for maintaining conative hygiene, he presents only one clear way in which ‘‘reason could play a part’’ in it.
One of the stratagems—the ‘‘best of all’’—is to ‘‘become accustomed to proceeding
methodically and sticking to sequences of thoughts for which reason, rather than
chance (i.e., insensible and fortuitous impressions), provides the thread’’ (RB 196).
This brings in the contrast between ‘‘empirics’’ and disciplined scientists, which
Leibniz often aligns with what separates experience and memory from ‘‘reason’’
(Mon 28; PNG 5). He is apparently saying that our desires and thus our behavior
will be better if our habits of thought are rooted in well-tested scientiﬁc theories
rather than in random anecdotes. He may be right; but this invocation of ‘‘reason’’
does not take us far; and it contributes nothing to my theme of reason’s role in the
teleological aspect of the human condition.
(2) Sometimes Leibniz takes reason to be a controller: the conative side of a
mature and thoughtful person involves appetite governed by reason. I have a suggestion about how that might be. Associating reason with reﬂective self-awareness,
and thus with mental episodes that are not defeatingly small, fast, or lacking in
variety, Leibniz may think that my bringing reason to bear on my appetitions
involves their standing out from their mental surroundings, so that I can become
aware that I have them and aware of what they are. ‘‘We think of many things all at
once, but pay heed only to the thoughts that stand out most distinctly’’ (RB 113). He
also holds that something of which we are not aware can be brought to our
awareness retrospectively:
When we are not alerted, so to speak, to pay heed to certain of our own present
perceptions, we allow them to slip by unconsidered and even unnoticed. But if
someone alerts us to them straight away, and makes us take note, for instance, of

Leibniz’s Two Realms

153

some noise which we have just heard, then we remember it and are aware of just
having had some sense of it. (RB 53–54)

This could be applied to appetitions as well, in the manner of some current styles
of psychotherapy, in which control of one’s drives is sought partly through becoming sharply aware of them. Leibniz was an acute observer of the human
psyche, and it would be in character for him to have some such thing as that in
mind. He wrote this to Bayle:
The soul does many things without knowing how it does them—when it does
them by means of confused perceptions and unconscious inclinations or appetitions, of which there are always an extremely large number, so that it is impossible
for the soul to be conscious of them, or to distinguish them clearly. (G 4:550/
WFPT 238)

Leibniz elaborates this as it applies to perceptions. When we enjoy a musical
sound, he writes, we are responding to some facts of which we are not distinctly
aware about the rate of vibration in the instrument; and when physics and music
theory enable us to know the facts, ‘‘reasoning has to come to our aid’’ (G 4:551/
WFPT 238). He does not return to appetitions in this context; but I guess that he
thinks reasoning can come to our aid with those too.
That, though, would not help much with my theme of teleology. It gives
reason a role in positioning you to make better, more informed decisions about
which of your drives and desires to go with, and which to discourage. This contribution of reason is over before the teleological work begins.

Reason as a Source of Moral Guidance
(3) Leibniz frequently says that reason is an instrument for the discovery of truths
about morals and value. ‘‘To speak against reason is to speak against the truth, for
reason is a chain of truths. This is to speak against oneself, and against one’s own
good, since the principal use of reason consists in knowing the good.’’ (RB 199).
‘‘Justice, taken quite generally, is nothing other than goodness in conformity with
reason’’ (PNG 9/WFPT 262–263). I have not found him explaining how reason
serves in moral discovery, but I shall not press that point here.
Moral knowledge obviously has a place in the life of one’s desires. In the
interplay among my various desires and inclinations, my knowledge or beliefs
about what would be good or right makes a difference. So that is another way in
which reason can enter the conative picture. Writing in one place about what we
need if we are ‘‘ﬁnally to gain control both of our passions and of our insensible
inclinations, or disquiets’’ (RB 188), Leibniz depicts reason not as controlling but as
guiding, not holding the tiller but displaying the compass. He writes that we should
acquire ‘‘the custom of acting in conformity with reason,’’ and so ‘‘we must make
this rule for ourselves once and for all: wait until you have the ﬁndings of reason
and from then on follow them.’’
That could give reason a working role in our lives; but once again it leaves the
teleological aspect dangling. A person may decide to act thus rather than so, taking

154 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

into account everything she knows about what that will involve—pleasure, misery,
social success or failure, moral success or failure. Reason-as-moral-compass supplies her with important material to take into account, but it does not enter into the
deciding, the teleological procedure in which someone acts because of a thought
about a possible future.
(4) If moral knowledge or belief is not merely a cognitive matter but has
something conative built into it, the picture changes. On that view, accepting a
moral proposition is not (only) believing or knowing something but essentially
involves endorsing an imperative addressed to oneself. That is a conative state: to
accept a moral proposition is to be inclined to behave thus rather than so. If reason
can give me the moral ‘‘knowledge’’ that essentially includes such a disposition,
then it is after all woven tightly into the conative side of my nature.
Leibniz sometimes wrote as though he took that view of moral principles. He
may be doing so in a passage I have already quoted: ‘‘In these ‘appetitions’ . . . one
looks only to the present; but experience and reason teach us to govern and
moderate them so that they can lead us to happiness’’ (RB 189). If reason teaches us
to govern our appetitions, then it is a source not merely of moral knowledge but of
moral injunctions. However, the matter is not clear, because the French could
mean that reason teaches us how to govern our appetitions, and that would fall
under option (3) rather than (4). Other passages, though, unambiguously point to
(4) reason as inherently conative: ‘‘Unless appetite is directed by reason, it endeavours after present pleasure rather than that lasting pleasure which is called
happiness’’ (RB 199–200). If reason can ‘‘direct’’ appetite, that is presumably because the moral propositions that reason lets us discover have imperative force.
There is further evidence in something that I chopped off the end of a previous quotation: ‘‘. . . the principal use of reason consists in knowing the good and
pursuing it.’’ I cannot understand this except as implying that moral knowledge (or
belief ) involves conative attitudes. The same thing is implied when Leibniz writes
of the ‘‘inclinations which reason gives us’’ (RB 194).
I do not quarrel with the thesis that any moral proposition incorporates an
imperative, so that accepting it involves adopting a conative attitude. (For sophisticated developments of this overall position see Gibbard 1990; Hare 1952,
1963, 1981.) But most of those who have adopted a position of this kind have
associated it with a certain subjectivism about the nature of morality, which has led
them to ﬁnd its human roots in feelings rather than in reason. They have indeed
been pushed that way by their inability to devise a credible epistemology for
morality if it is taken to be objective and factual. Someone who holds as Leibniz
does that reason can discover objective moral truths, and who also holds (as I
am conjecturing that Leibniz also does) that accepting such a truth involves a
conative element, has a lot of explaining to do. I have not found that Leibniz does
any of it.
R. M. Hare, uniquely among moral philosophers who accord to moral
propositions a kind of subjectivity and hold that accepting such a proposition is like
accepting an imperative, maintains that morality can be established a priori. His
argument for this is a vivid tour de force that seems not to have converted anyone. It
would be astonishing, to say the least, if Leibniz ever entertained anything like it.

Leibniz’s Two Realms

155

Notes
1. In addition to those common to this book, the following abbreviations are used to refer to
Leibniz’s works. CT: Critical Thoughts on the General Part of Descartes’s Principles (G 4:354–392/L 383–
412); NI: On Nature Itself (G 4:504–516/WFPT 209–222); PAB: A Physicist against Barbarism (G 7:337–
344/AG 312–320); SD: Specimen of Dynamics (GM 6:243–254/WFPT 153–179); TA: Tentamen Anagogicum (G 7:270–279/L 477–485); UO: On the Ultimate Origination of Things (G 7:302–308/AG 149–155).
2. For Leibniz (sometimes) and his predecessors, an a priori explanation of P explains why it is the
case that P, whereas an a posteriori one merely provides reason for thinking that P is true.
3. Something similar appears at RB 56. Leibniz there seems to assign the conative role to perceptions, but I suppose he means changes of perception, i.e. appetitions.
4. I owe the idea of such a generalization to Taylor 1964. My most recent development of it is in
Bennett 1991b.
5. This theory occupies eleven sections that run across the bottoms of pp. 248–273 in the Nidditch
edition. The theory with which Locke replaced it occupies Essay 2.21.28–59.
6. ‘Awareness’ is the correct translation for Leibniz’s ‘apperception.’ To use ‘apperception’ as an
English word is historically insensitive and linguistically absurd. For details see Bennett 2001: sec. 113.
7. He speaks of distinct ‘‘perceptions’’ and of distinct ‘‘ideas’’; and, although I agree with Brandom
(1981: 453–459) that often Leibniz took these to be different concepts, he usually runs them together
when, as here, he is trying to separate reason or intellect from the other capacities of the mind.

8

Leibniz on Spontaneity
DONALD RUTHERFORD

hilosophers have long held that it is a necessary condition for acting freely that

P an agent act spontaneously, or that she determine herself to act, as opposed to

being determined by external causes. Only if an action can be attributed to an
agent’s will as its cause can the action be judged to have been performed freely.
The condition of spontaneity, however, can be understood in a variety of ways
corresponding to the different kinds of constraint that may be thought to restrict
the operation of an agent’s will. Most weakly, spontaneity may require only the
absence of physical constraint. An agent can be judged to have acted of her own
will, provided she has not been determined to act by external physical causes, for
example, she has not been pushed or drugged. More restrictively, spontaneity may
demand also the absence of psychological constraint. Traditionally, this has been
associated with cases of coercion, where an agent is forced to act against her will
because of fear induced by a threat. But the idea of psychological constraint can be
generalized to include the force of any passion (grief, anger, lust) that disrupts an
agent’s ability to exercise her will.
For Spinoza, the absence of such constraint is both a necessary and sufﬁcient
condition for freedom, although he also believes that the possession of this freedom
is consistent with the determination of an agent’s actions by prior causes.1 The last
claim is challenged by Kant, who argues that the freedom required for morality
presupposes that an agent’s will possess an ‘‘absolute spontaneity,’’ deﬁned as the
absence of all causal constraint. This strongest form of spontaneity consists in the
will’s independence from all determination by prior causes, whether those causes
be external physical events or internal mental representations.2 On any weaker
construal, Kant writes, the consciousness of spontaneity, if taken as freedom, would
be a ‘‘mere delusion’’ (Ak 5:101).
The preceding range of views provides a starting point for understanding
Leibniz’s account of spontaneity. Leibniz defends spontaneity as a necessary condition for freedom, and deﬁnes it generally in terms of the absence of constraint.3 At
the same time, he extends the scope of spontaneity in a way that many have found
156

Leibniz on Spontaneity

157

puzzling. According to Leibniz, every substance is the sole cause of all of its own
states; thus, every change that occurs in it occurs spontaneously. On the face of it,
this may seem close to Kant’s view that any meaningful notion of spontaneity must
be absolute: complete independence from the causal order of nature. In fact,
however, the positions of the two philosophers are sharply opposed. Although
Leibniz believes that any substance is causally isolated from every other substance,
he insists that each of a substance’s states is causally determined by prior states of it.
Thus spontaneity, for Leibniz, does not imply the absence of causal determination.4
This is highlighted in his famous image of the monad as a ‘‘spiritual automaton’’
(T 52), which Kant scornfully dismisses as leaving us with nothing more than the
‘‘freedom of a turnspit’’ (Ak 5:97).
The division between Leibniz and Kant on the issue of spontaneity hinges on
difﬁcult questions about the sort of freedom that morality demands and about what
can plausibly be claimed on behalf of the will’s freedom. I do not intend to enter
into these disputes here. My concern rather is with a problem internal to Leibniz’s
account of spontaneity and its relation to his conception of freedom. The problem
is one that arises because of Leibniz’s intention both to uphold central features
of traditional treatments of spontaneity—particularly spontaneity as absence of
physical constraint—and to extend the scope of spontaneous action to include
every change in the state of a substance. The former commitment implies that
there is a salient distinction between cases in which an agent acts spontaneously, and
hence may be judged to have acted freely, and cases in which an agent cannot be
judged to have acted freely because the condition of spontaneity has not been met.
Yet, if every change in a substance occurs spontaneously, then it seems that such a
distinction cannot be drawn. Hence Leibniz fails to offer a satisfactory account of
spontaneity’s relation to freedom.
In this essay I reconstruct Leibniz’s theory of spontaneity in a way that makes
clear his ability to respond to this objection. The crucial step involves distinguishing what I call ‘‘monadic spontaneity’’ and ‘‘agent spontaneity’’—the latter
of which requires the absence of physical constraint. A second objective is to
understand why Leibniz attaches such importance to the notion of monadic
spontaneity in the analysis of freedom. Although the thesis of monadic spontaneity appears at ﬁrst glance to rule out the possibility of constraint, I argue that
the thesis in fact supports what Leibniz takes to be the only adequate explanation
of this phenomenon. In the next section I sketch the distinction between Leibniz’s two notions of spontaneity and the different roles they play in his theory
of action. Thereafter I examine the two notions of spontaneity in greater detail,
showing ﬁnally how they are brought together by Leibniz in a single theory
capable of accounting for both the will’s freedom and its constraint by external
causes.

Two Notions of Spontaneity
One of Leibniz’s best known explications of the concept of freedom appears in
Theodicy 288:

158 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
Freedom, such as is required by the schools of theology, consists in intelligence,
which includes a distinct knowledge of the object of deliberation; in spontaneity,
in virtue of which we determine ourselves; and in contingency, that is, in the
exclusion of logical or metaphysical necessity. Intelligence is, as it were, the soul of
freedom, and the rest is as its body and basis. The free substance determines itself
by itself, and this according to the motive of the good perceived by the understanding, which inclines it without necessitating it; and all the conditions are
contained in these few words. (G 6:288)

Leibniz isolates three conditions as individually necessary and jointly sufﬁcient
for freedom: intelligence, spontaneity, and contingency. He labels the ﬁrst condition the ‘‘soul of freedom.’’ Intelligence is the power of mind by which rational
beings are distinguished from other substances, and rational minds alone possess
freedom. Further, the free acts of such minds are limited to those in which
choice is directed by a distinct knowledge of the object of deliberation. The other
two conditions, spontaneity and contingency, Leibniz describes as the ‘‘body and
basis’’ (le corps et la base) of freedom. The latter requirement, speciﬁed as ‘‘the
exclusion of logical or metaphysical necessity,’’ is an obvious condition on freedom. In addition, Leibniz insists that an action is free only if it is one in which
‘‘we determine ourselves.’’ How precisely to understand this condition is left
unclear in the passage. If, as Spinoza holds, to determine oneself to act is to be
‘‘led by reason’’ (CWS 584), then one might question whether spontaneity warrants inclusion as a separate condition on freedom. If one determines oneself to
act only if one acts rationally, then one acts spontaneously only if one’s choices
are guided by intelligence. However, this is not Leibniz’s position. The ﬁnal
sentence of the quoted passage suggests, instead, that he sees himself as offering
three independent conditions on freedom: ‘‘The free substance determines itself
by itself [spontaneity], and this according to the motive of the good perceived
by the understanding [intelligence], which inclines it without necessitating it
[contingency].’’
Although a free substance ‘‘determines itself by itself . . . according to the
motive of the good perceived by the understanding,’’ there is no implication that
this is the only way a substance can determine itself or act spontaneously. This is
conﬁrmed in dramatic fashion two sections later in the Theodicy, when Leibniz
claims that, strictly speaking, every action of a substance, whether or not that
substance is a rational mind, occurs spontaneously:
[W]hen it is a question of explaining oneself precisely, I maintain that our
spontaneity suffers no exception and that external things have no physical inﬂuence on us, speaking with philosophical rigor.
In order to better understand this point, we must realize that a genuine
spontaneity is common to us and all simple substances, and that in the intelligent
or free substance this becomes a dominion over its actions. . . . (T 290–291/G 6:289)

In the case of substances endowed with intelligence, there is a distinction to be
drawn between free and unfree acts; however, this distinction is not drawn on the
basis of the spontaneity of those acts, for, ‘‘speaking with philosophical rigor,’’ every
change in every substance is a consequence of its spontaneous action.5

Leibniz on Spontaneity

159

This is no trivial commitment on Leibniz’s part. It is the metaphysical bedrock
of his system of preestablished harmony. Given this, one may wonder whether
Leibniz has anything interesting to say about spontaneity as it relates to the understanding of freedom. In Theodicy 288, Leibniz groups spontaneity and contingency together as the ‘‘body and basis’’ of freedom. This suggests conditions that
are presupposed by freedom but are not themselves the ground of the distinction
between free and unfree acts; that role is reserved for intelligence, the ‘‘soul’’ of
freedom. Contingency clearly qualiﬁes as such a condition. If it were logically or
metaphysically necessary that an agent act in a certain way, then she could not be
said to have acted freely. Likewise, if an agent does not act spontaneously—if she
does not determine herself to act but instead is determined to act by external
causes—then she cannot be said to have acted freely. At this point, however,
Leibniz makes what seems an unwarranted leap to the doctrine of monadic
spontaneity: the view that any substance is the sole cause of all its own states.
In doing so, he appears to overlook a narrower notion of spontaneity—agent
spontaneity—that is integral to the understanding of freedom. Spontaneity in this
more restricted sense is intended to mark the contrast between changes that we
produce as agents and changes that occur as a result of external causes acting on us.
Given the thesis of monadic spontaneity, however, it seems that we cannot even
draw this distinction, for, according to that account, all of a substance’s active and
passive states are produced by its own actions.6
Many of Leibniz’s statements about spontaneity leave him open to this criticism. In invoking the doctrine of monadic spontaneity, he seems to have opted for
the wrong notion of spontaneity, one that is not directly implicated in the understanding of freedom. The relevant condition on freedom is one that deﬁnes it in
terms of the absence of external causes that could have preempted the operation of
the will, not one that renders constraint by external causes impossible.
A further line of argument nonetheless leads Leibniz to conclude that monadic spontaneity is the ‘‘body and basis’’ of freedom. As he sees it, our ability to
draw a distinction between constrained and unconstrained action presupposes an
answer to a fundamental metaphysical problem. To explain what it means to be
constrained by external causes requires an account of how the soul’s volitions can
be resisted by its body and by the actions of external bodies on it. Similarly, the
explanation of unconstrained action requires an account of how the soul’s volitions
can be effective in altering the states of its body and through it the states of other
bodies. In Leibniz’s view, no previous philosopher has offered a satisfactory explanation of these phenomena, and no explanation can be given, provided that we
take them to involve a real causal interaction between substances. According to
Leibniz, the distinction between constrained and unconstrained action can only be
rendered intelligible in terms of the hypothesis of preestablished harmony, which
itself rests on the doctrine of monadic spontaneity. Thus, although agent spontaneity
may be a requirement of freedom, the possibility of agent spontaneity presupposes
the truth of monadic spontaneity. Therefore, monadic spontaneity is properly the
‘‘body and basis’’ of freedom.
The hypothesis of preestablished harmony afﬁrms the causal independence
of soul and body: ‘‘everything happens in the soul as if there were no body, just

160 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

as . . . everything happens in the body as if there were no soul’’ (G 4:560/WF 113).
The foundation of this hypothesis is the doctrine of monadic spontaneity, which
maintains that any substantial form, or ‘‘entelechy,’’ is causally sufﬁcient for the
production of all its own states.7 On the basis of this principle, Leibniz extends the
scope of a soul’s spontaneous action to encompass all of the changes that occur in
it, including states in which it represents itself as acted on by physical causes:
[E]veryone who accepts immaterial indivisible substances attributes to them a
simultaneous multitude of perceptions, and a spontaneity in their reasonings and
their voluntary acts. I am therefore only extending that spontaneity to their confused and involuntary thoughts, and showing that their nature is to contain relations with everything that is external. (G 4:564/WF 118)

As much as its voluntary acts, states in which the soul represents itself as constrained by physical causes come about through its own action, independent of any
action on it by external things. What we take to be instances of the interaction of
soul and body are, from the perspective of the soul, explained entirely in terms of
the determination of the soul’s representational states by prior states of it.8
Strictly speaking, then, there is ‘‘no constraint in substances except in external
appearances’’ (G 4:558/WF 111). Yet just because constraint is not grounded in facts
about real causal relations between substances, it does not follow that it can or
should be ignored. The signiﬁcance of this point goes beyond Leibniz’s stated goal
of preserving ordinary ways of speaking.9 The distinction between constrained and
unconstrained action is indispensable for our conception of ourselves and other
creatures as agents who possess a will. Not being God, ﬁnite creatures represent
their agency as effected through a body, which can resist their will, either directly
or through the action of other bodies on it. The category of constraint expresses our
conception of such hindrances or failures of agency, just as the category of unconstrained or spontaneous action expresses our conception of ourselves as acting
of our own will. As Leibniz draws the distinction in the New Essays:
[W]e can take to be its ‘action,’ and attribute to the substance itself, any change
through which it comes closer to its own perfection; and can take to be its ‘passion,’
and attribute to it an outside cause (though not an immediate one), any change in
which the reverse happens; because the change can be explained in an intelligible
way by reference to the substance itself in the former case and by reference to outer
things in the latter. (NE 2.21.72/RB 211)

Regardless of how the soul’s states are determined causally, the concepts of agency
and constraint (or, more generally, action and passion), remain basic to how we
explain what we do and what happens to us. Leibniz sees it as a strength of his
theory that, in the strictest sense, the soul’s actions are not constrained by any
external causes. Nevertheless, saying just this leaves us without a way of conceptualizing what we take ourselves to be capable of doing as agents. It is this notion of
agent spontaneity that is presupposed by the analysis of the will’s freedom, and for
this reason the contrast between it and constrained action is indispensable to us.10
Leibniz’s considered view, therefore, is that the notion of spontaneity must be
understood in two distinct senses, corresponding to what I have called ‘‘monadic

Leibniz on Spontaneity

161

spontaneity’’ and ‘‘agent spontaneity.’’ The doctrine of monadic spontaneity articulates a basic metaphysical truth: any substance is self-determining in the production of all its own states. At the same time, Leibniz allows that, among these
states, we can distinguish those in which a substance operates as an agent promoting change in the world, relative to its own perspective and that of other
substances (including God), and those in which it operates as the passive recipient
of the effects of external causes, relative to its own perspective and that of other
substances (including God).
Both of Leibniz’s notions of spontaneity raise signiﬁcant interpretative issues.
As Leibniz understands it, monadic spontaneity is deﬁned by a kind of causation in
which states of a monad determine, without necessitating, subsequent states of it.
In the next section, I present an account of the dynamics of such change that aims
to demonstrate how monadic spontaneity is supportive of both the contingency of
change and the effectiveness of individual monadic states in producing change. In
subsequent sections I explore the resources Leibniz has for developing a conception of agent spontaneity within the framework deﬁned by monadic spontaneity.

Monadic Spontaneity and the Contingency of Change
Leibniz relies on a general model of change that he formulates early in his career
and retains as an essential component of his theory of monads. The model makes
two signiﬁcant assumptions:
(1)

Within nature, all real change is modal change, i.e., change in the
states or modiﬁcations of substances. Once created, substances
endure through all change and can be destroyed only by God.
(2) Any nonmiraculous change in a substance’s states can be explained
in terms of the action of that substance, without reference to any
other created substance.11

Leibniz has various things to say on behalf of these assumptions, but here I propose
to take them as entry points to his discussion of change. The second assumption
introduces the idea of the causal isolation of substances, which forms the backbone
of the theory of preestablished harmony. Leibniz’s account of change is intended
to explain how this demand can be met. His critique of intersubstantial causality—
in particular, physical inﬂux—is meant to show that there is no other coherent
explanation of modal change.
Change, according to one of Leibniz’s deﬁnitions, is ‘‘an aggregate of two
contradictory states’’ (A 6.4:556), that is, two states of the same substance that exclude
each other. In another study from the 1680s, he writes: ‘‘A state of a thing exists if
there is any true contingent proposition whose subject is the thing. Change is an
aggregate of contradictory states’’ (A 6.4:569). By itself, however, this deﬁnition
appears inadequate, since it includes no notion of one state following from another.
Accordingly, Leibniz amends the deﬁnition to read: ‘‘Change is an aggregate of two
contradictory states, from one of which the other follows immediately; by reasoning,
I understand that it follows immediately, i.e., such that no other like state intervenes’’
(A 6.4:569).

162 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Change thus involves both a pair of contradictory states and an ordering
relation that deﬁnes one state as the successor of the other. The idea of one state
following from another is subject to further analysis in other texts from the period.
The result is a general account of the succession of states in a substance:
Of two contradictory states of the same thing, that one is prior in time, which is
prior by nature, or which involves the ground [rationem] of the other, or, what is
equivalent, which is understood more easily [facilius intelligitur]. Just as in a
clock, in order to understand perfectly the present state of the gears, it is required
that we understand the ground of this state, which is contained in the preceding
state, and so on. And the same is true in any other series of things, for there is
always a deﬁnite connection, though it is not always necessary. (A 6.4:563)

As part of his explanation of change, Leibniz proposes an analysis of the temporal
ordering of states in terms of their causal ordering, which he casts as an ordering
on the basis of ‘‘grounds.’’ Of two contradictory states, one is temporally prior to
another only if the former is ‘‘prior by nature’’ to, or contains the ground of, the
latter. Leibniz interprets this grounding relation as both an ontological and an
explanatory relation: the grounding state contains what is sufﬁcient to bring about
and to render intelligible the existence of the state which it grounds. In this sense,
the grounding state is a ‘‘predeterminant’’ of the grounded state.12 As Leibniz’s
example makes clear, the ordering relation does not have to be one in which a
given state logically entails its successor. The relation may be only hypothetically
necessary, or necessary relative to a certain ‘‘mode of producing’’ (A 6.4:872). Thus,
the present state of the clock’s gears does not logically entail a unique subsequent
state but does so only relative to certain laws of motion. This point is crucial to
Leibniz’s defense of the contingency of change within the created world.
The preceding analysis remains at a high level of abstraction. It is brought
down to earth when Leibniz speciﬁes the nature of the ground responsible for the
succession of a substance’s states. Another version of his deﬁnition of change reads:
‘‘change [transitio], or variation, itself . . . is nothing but a complex of two states
which are immediate and opposite to each other, together with a force or [seu]
reason for the change, which reason itself is a quality’’ (C 9/MP 134). Here the
ground or reason for change is identiﬁed as a force, which is described as a quality,
or ‘‘intrinsic accidental denomination,’’ of substance (C 9/MP 134). At this point
Leibniz’s account of change is united with his theory of substance. According to
Leibniz, every substance is necessarily active, or a source of change. On its weaker
reading, this thesis implies that whatever is a substance is not purely passive but has
within it a force or power by which it acts to bring about changes in its own states.
The stronger version of the thesis—monadic spontaneity—adds the claim not only
that a substance is causally active but that the force it contains is sufﬁcient to
determine each of its successive states. Thus, monadic spontaneity implies that in
all of its changes a substance is self-determining: it has the particular states it does
by virtue of acting on itself and not by virtue of any other created substance acting
on it.13
Several distinct lines of argument converge on this thesis. In writings from the
1680s, Leibniz stresses the ‘‘completeness’’ of the nature of any substance, the fact

Leibniz on Spontaneity

163

(defended by considerations of individuation and divine foreknowledge) that part
of what it is to be an individual substance is to possess a nature that includes
the ground of everything that will ever be true of that substance. Coupled with the
proposition that any substance is by nature active, or a source of change, this
implies that any substance is causally self-sufﬁcient: capable of bringing about all
of its own states, as if only it and God existed (DM 14). Later, in the Monadology,
Leibniz presents the thesis differently. He writes that he will ‘‘take for granted that
every created being, and consequently the created monad as well, is subject to
change, and even that this change is continual in each thing’’ (Mon 10). However,
in a substance that is truly simple or without parts, it is impossible to explain how
such change can occur through the inﬂuence of other created beings. A monad has
no parts that can be added to or subtracted from; and it has ‘‘no windows through
which something can enter or leave’’ (Mon 7). It follows that a monad’s ‘‘natural
changes’’ can come only from ‘‘an internal principle, since no external cause can
inﬂuence it internally’’ (Mon 11). Thus, he concludes, ‘‘one can call simple substances or created monads ‘entelechies’. . . . They have a self-sufﬁciency (autarkeia)
that makes them the sources of their internal actions, and, so to speak, incorporeal
automata’’ (Mon 18).
There is no reason to think that these accounts are fundamentally at odds;
however, if our aim is to understand a substance’s capacity for change, we should
focus on the idea that a substance by nature is endowed with a force sufﬁcient to
bring about changes in its own states. One of the most important points Leibniz
makes about this force is that it is a conative power, akin to appetite or desire. At the
most basic level, change comes about in a substance as a result of an ‘‘endeavor’’ or
‘‘striving’’ for future states. In the New Essays, Leibniz describes the soul as ‘‘an
entelechy—i.e., a primary or substantial endeavor . . . accompanied by perception’’
(RB 170). In more technical writings, he refers to this same principle as ‘‘primitive
active force.’’ Distinctive about this entelechy, or primitive force, is that it is not
simply the capacity or potential to act but a force from which action spontaneously
follows. Active force, he writes, ‘‘involves an endeavor [conatus] or striving [tendentia] towards actions, so that, unless something impedes it, action results’’
(G 4:395/AG 252; see G 4:469–470/L 433).14
Leibniz is less explicit than he might be about the dynamics of modal
change.15 One unresolved issue is whether the force relevant to explaining change
in a substance is the ‘‘primary or substantial endeavor’’ deﬁnitive of the substance’s
nature, or the varying moments of endeavor that characterize its successive states.
For purposes of discussion, call the former the ‘‘primitive force theory,’’ the latter,
the ‘‘derivative force theory.’’16 The primitive force theory explains spontaneity by
crediting substance with a nature that is both productive and law-like. The states of
a substance are determined to evolve in a ﬁxed pattern, by virtue of the fact that the
substance’s nature, or primitive force, is expressed in accordance with a determinate principle of order—its ‘‘law of the series.’’17 From this, monadic spontaneity
follows directly. By virtue of its nature, any substance is, as it were, an ‘‘incorporeal
automaton’’ that, once created, runs through a succession of prearranged states.
The primitive force theory cites the fact that a substance’s activity is expressed
in accordance with a ‘‘law of the series’’ as an explanation of the changes in its

164 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

states. Against this, the derivative force theory holds that changes in a substance’s
states can only be explained adequately in terms of a property of those states
themselves: their inherent tendency to give way to new states. In late works,
Leibniz refers to these tendencies as a monad’s ‘‘appetitions’’:
a monad, in itself and at a moment, can be distinguished from another only by its
internal qualities and actions, which can be nothing but its perceptions (that is, the
representation of the composite, or what is external, in the simple) and its appetitions (that is, its tendencies to go from one perception to another) which are the
principles of change. (G 6:598/AG 207)18

An analogy may help to motivate this alternative account of change. Imagine a line
of dominoes that has been arranged to fall in a particular order once the ﬁrst
member of the series has been pushed against the second. The dominoes have
been ordered such that the resulting cascade realizes a certain pattern. Suppose we
now ask why domino n þ 1 falls after domino n. One answer would be, simply, that
this is how they have been arranged to fall: the setup has been designed such that
this event happens as part of a larger pattern. Yet this might be found insufﬁcient as
an answer to the question of why domino n þ 1 falls as it does, or alternatively why
it fails to fall. To answer this question, we need to know exactly how n þ 1 is struck
by n, and how this action does, or does not, lead to the intended outcome. So,
the proponent of the derivative force theory concludes, if we want to explain the
change in a substance’s states—the fact that state n is succeeded by state n þ 1—we
need to refer to more than the substance’s law of the series. We require, in addition, an explanation of why the appetitive force associated with n is sufﬁcient to
bring about n þ 1, as opposed to any other state.
The primitive force theory makes one point that is uncontroversial. Ontologically, primitive force is prior to derivative force, a monad’s entelechy prior to its
appetitions. If there were no substantial principle of action, there would no instances of acting in this way or that—any more than there would be shapes if there
were no extension to be shaped.19 With respect to the explanation of modal
change, however, there is reason to question the adequacy of the primitive force
theory. Recall that, for Leibniz, change is deﬁned in terms of a pair of mutually
exclusive contingent states, and a reason or force by which those states are connected as prior and posterior. On his account, the reason for the transition from
one state to another is identiﬁed as a property speciﬁc to the prior state (Leibniz
refers to it as ‘‘an intrinsic accidental denomination’’) that explains why that state is
succeeded by its actual successor and not by some other state.
A defender of the primitive force theory might argue that such an explanation is
precisely what the law of the series delivers: state n þ 1 succeeds state n because that
is how the law determines it to be. But such a response is unsatisfactory. In the ﬁrst
place, it is unclear what it means to say that a substance’s law of the series determines
the changes in its states. In speaking of a ‘law,’ we usually mean something propositional, an item of knowledge. Taken in this sense, a law’s determination of a
substance’s states cannot be a case of causal determination. At most, it can be
construed as a type of entailment: given the law of the series, it is true that S’s being
in state n is followed by S’s being in state n þ 1. Appeal to the law of the series in this

Leibniz on Spontaneity

165

sense fails as an explanation of the dynamics of change. The law of the series
expresses the global ordering of a substance’s states, but it does not explain how, in a
given substance, there is a transition from state n to state n þ 1.
Of course, Leibniz thinks of the law of the series as more than a formula or
proposition. He identiﬁes it with a real substantial power, or entelechy. But we are,
I suggest, no better off if we follow Leibniz in interpreting the law of the series in
this way. For it is characteristic of such a power qua law that it is perpetual and
unchanging; it is that which ‘‘contains’’ all the particular changing states of the
substance. Although such an unchanging ground is presupposed by change, it does
not explain change: the fact that S’s being in state n is followed by its being in state
n þ 1. Consequently, the primitive force theorist either is left with no explanation
of change, or is pushed back to an explanation in terms of derivative force, saying
something like: the law of the series determines that state n þ 1 succeeds state
n, because n is a modiﬁcation of the primitive force expressed in the law of the
series, and n is causally sufﬁcient for the occurrence of n þ 1.20
Comparing theories in this way, we can surmise that rather than being rivals,
the primitive and derivative force theories are better understood as complementary
components of a single theory of monadic spontaneity.21 Rather than offering
competing answers to the same question, the two theories provide mutually supportive answers to different questions—what we might distinguish as the ‘‘why’’
and ‘‘how’’ of change. The primitive force theory provides an answer to the
question of why there is change at all in a monad. As the term implies, derivative
forces are only causally efﬁcacious to the extent that substance itself is. It is
the primitive force, entelechy, or substantial power, that is the ultimate ground of
change in the created world. Yet, insofar as we are concerned to understand the
how of change, or to explain the changes that occur in the states of substances,
there are good textual and philosophical reasons for taking Leibniz to hold that
such changes are explained in terms of the determination of one state by another,
where the relevant causal factor is the derivative force, or appetition, associated
with the prior state. Somewhat more speculatively, we may suppose that to the
extent that a substance, or its nature, is properly conceived of as a cause, it is so
only in the sense of possessing a determinable power that can be expressed in a
variety of determinate ways. A substance’s primitive active force acts in a determinate manner productive of change only insofar as it is modiﬁed by some derivative force or appetition.
The preceding account shows clearly why Leibniz is entitled to think of modal
change as contingent. From the point of view of dynamics, no logical, metaphysical,
or conceptual necessity determines that a monad should pass from state n to state
n þ 1. Such a transition occurs only if n is endowed with a force that is sufﬁcient,
relative to the appropriate dynamical law, to bring about state n þ 1.22 In this
respect, the changes that occur within the monad are on a par with the physical
changes that occur within a system of bodies. Such a system undergoes a transition
from some dynamical state d to state d + 1 only if d is characterized by forces that
are sufﬁcient, relative to the appropriate dynamical laws, to bring about d þ 1. No
one would suggest in this case that d + 1 is logically necessitated by d, and there is
no more reason to suppose that this is so in the case of the transition between two

166 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

states of a monad. Thus, the causal determination that underlies monadic spontaneity is fully consistent with the contingency of modal change.

Teleology and Monadic Spontaneity
Leibniz conceives of the monad as subject to continual change: monadic states are
always giving way to new states, as a consequence of the forces inherent in them.
This would seem to imply that monadic states are genuinely efﬁcacious: they (or
their properties) are causes that make things happen. Yet what kind of causes
precisely? Are they, for example, properly characterized as efﬁcient causes? Intuitively, it seems, the answer should be yes. The appetitions associated with particular monadic states are productive of new states. Hence they are efﬁcient causes
of those states.
While this may seem an obvious conclusion, it is in tension with some of the
things Leibniz says about soul-like substances. In Monadology 79, he writes: ‘‘Souls
act according to the laws of ﬁnal causes, through appetitions, ends, and means.
Bodies act according to the laws of efﬁcient causes or of motions’’ (G 6:620/AG
223). Here, as in other texts, Leibniz appears to limit efﬁcient causation to the
physical interactions of bodies, and to identify changes in the soul, or monad, with
the operation of a kind of ﬁnal causation. As suggested earlier, Leibniz conceives of
monadic activity on analogy with appetite or desire. According to his metaphysics,
every monad is by nature active (an entelechy or source of change), and its activity
is inherently conative (the endeavor toward a future state). What must be added to
this is that monadic activity is also inherently teleological, that is, an endeavor
toward future states based on a conception of their goodness or the goodness
represented in them. As Leibniz writes in the Principles of Nature and Grace,
‘‘perceptions in the monad arise from one another by the laws of appetites, or of the
ﬁnal causes of good and evil’’ (G 6:599/AG 207).
Recognition of the role played by teleology in the operation of the monad adds
an important dimension to Leibniz’s account of spontaneity. Yet to the extent that
Leibniz himself opposes causation within the monadic realm to the efﬁcient causation operative in the physical realm, it also raises a problem for his account. If the
appetitive forces associated with monadic states do not function as efﬁcient causes,
how are we to understand the capacity of those states to lead spontaneously to new
states? The problem in this case is largely terminological. While maintaining that
souls, or monads, ‘‘act according to the laws of ﬁnal causes,’’ Leibniz is clear that
appetitive forces are genuinely efﬁcacious in bringing about changes in a monad’s
states.23 His point, therefore, is not that monadic states do not act as efﬁcient causes
of subsequent states but that those actions cannot be explained by appeal to the
laws of efﬁcient causation that govern the actions of bodies. Rather, changes within
the monad are produced by forces that act according to the ‘‘laws of ﬁnal causes.’’
Saying just this, however, leaves unexplained the relation between appetitive
forces and the laws of ﬁnal causation by which they operate. Suppose s1 and s2 are
successive states of a monad, and the reason or ground of the change from s1 to s2
is the appetitive force associated with s1. Suppose further that appetitive force,

Leibniz on Spontaneity

167

in general, is an endeavor toward some good, and that this endeavor is stronger in
proportion to the magnitude of that good. On the face of it, the efﬁcacy of this force
can be understood in either of two ways: in terms of the intrinsic goodness of the
state toward which it tends (s2), or in terms of the goodness of s2 as represented by s1.
If the force operates according to what I shall call the ‘‘law of natural teleology,’’
then the effectiveness of the force in bringing about a transition from s1 to s2 is
explained by the fact that s2 is objectively the best state for the monad to be in next.
If, on the other hand, the force operates according to the ‘‘law of desire teleology,’’
then its effectiveness in bringing about a transition from s1 to s2 is explained by the
fact that s1 represents s2 as the state of greatest goodness relative to it.
If appetition operates according to the law of natural teleology, then changes
within the monad are determined in accordance with an external standard of
goodness. Given any state of the monad, there is a determinate answer to the
question of what its next state should be relative to the rest of the universe, and the
appetitive force associated with the prior state will be just that force sufﬁcient to
bring about the appropriate successor state. If appetition operates according to
the law of desire teleology, on the other hand, this conclusion does not follow. The
appetitive force associated with any monadic state will depend upon what that state
represents as goods attainable in future states. In this case, there is no assumption
that the good for the sake of which the monad acts is the greatest good, relative to it
or the universe. The forces that determine changes in its states are a function of
what appear to it as goods, and in the case of any created monad such appearances
can be mistaken.
Leibniz draws on both these notions of teleology in explaining the changes
that occur in a monad’s states. Sometimes he discusses monadic change in terms
of the realization of an objectively optimal state of affairs, for example, universal
harmony among the states of soul-like substances; at other times he conceives of
this change as the product of a monad’s striving for what it represents as the greatest
good. The question is how these two notions of teleology relate to each other. One
possibility is that Leibniz posits a division of labor between them, based on the
phenomenon to be explained. In the domain of psychology, where we aim to
explain how appetite and volition contribute to action, the law of desire teleology is
most appropriate. Here we are interested in how rational and nonrational creatures
come to act, given their particular representations of the good—representations
that may be inaccurate. By contrast, if we are concerned to explain the general fact
of monadic change, then our attention should be focused on the law of natural
teleology, since it is Leibniz’s view, developed in the doctrine of preestablished
harmony, that any change in a monad is regulated in such a way as to bring about
an optimal outcome.
The generality of the latter requirement suggests that it is a mistake to think of
a division of labor between these two forms of teleological explanation. Instead,
Leibniz’s position must be that any case of a monad acting according to the law of
desire teleology is also a case of its acting according to the law of natural teleology,
for the latter is a completely general form of explanation that applies to all changes
in the monad. But have we any reason to think that the converse also holds: that
any case of a monad acting according to the law of natural teleology also must be

168 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

a case of its acting according to the law of desire teleology? If we are sensitive to the
difference between the notions of appetition and desire, I believe, the answer is no.
Although every change in every monad can be explained in terms of appetitive
forces operating according to the law of natural teleology, not every such change is
an example of the monad acting according to the law of desire teleology, that is, of
its acting to bring about the state that it represents as containing the greatest good.
Distinguishing cases in this way, I shall argue, is the best way of understanding
Leibniz’s notion of agent spontaneity, and of why it deserves to be treated as an
independent condition on freedom.

Agent Spontaneity
In late works such as the Theodicy, Leibniz defends a general theory of the will,
according to which appetite and desire operate in the same manner in all created
beings.24 Without making any claim for completeness, we can summarize the
theory in ﬁve propositions:
(1) There is no absolute indifference of the will (T 35, 46, 302–303;
T k16).
(2) There is no appetite or desire except as determined by the representation of some good (T 33, 45).
(3) The motivational force of any appetite or desire is proportional to
the apparent goodness of its object (T 287).
(4) When the soul acts (or chooses) it does so in accordance with its
strongest motive; that is, the desire for the greatest apparent good
prevails (T k13).
(5) Under the inﬂuence of competing motives, the soul infallibly
chooses the greatest apparent good, but it is not necessitated to do
so, for it is determined to act by motives that ‘‘incline without
necessitating’’ (T 45, 310; T k14).25

Leibniz relates the spontaneity of the soul’s actions most directly to propositions (2)
and (4). According to the former, the soul’s natural endeavor is rendered determinate as the desire for certain goods. This could be understood simply as a matter of
the soul’s reacting to the impressions made on it by external objects. This was
Hobbes’s view.26 Leibniz, however, interprets desire as arising not in response to
objects themselves but to representations of objects as goods:
Although an active substance is determined only by itself, it does not follow that it
is not moved by objects: for it is the representation of the object within it which
contributes towards the determination. Now the representation does not come
from without, and consequently there is complete spontaneity. Objects do not act
upon intelligent substances as efﬁcient and physical causes, but as ﬁnal and moral
causes. . . . When we say that an intelligent substance is moved by the goodness of
its object, we do not assert that this object is necessarily a being existing outside the
substance, and it is enough for us that it be conceivable: for its representation acts
in the substance, or rather the substance acts upon itself, insofar as it is disposed
and inﬂuenced by this representation. (T k20–21/G 6:421–423/H 427–428)

Leibniz on Spontaneity

169

According to Leibniz, desire can be understood as the result either of the represented object acting on the soul as a ﬁnal cause, or of the soul’s acting on itself,
‘‘insofar as it is disposed and inﬂuenced by this representation.’’ Because the soul’s
desires are determined by representations of objects, and representations are internal to the soul, spontaneity is preserved up to this point.
Leibniz’s second main claim about spontaneity, articulated in (4), is that when
the soul acts (or chooses), and thereby undergoes a change of state, it does so as
determined by its strongest desire. The rationale for this claim is conveyed in an
image Leibniz employs in his ﬁfth letter to Clarke: ‘‘reasons in the mind of a wise
being, and motives in any mind whatsoever, do that which corresponds to the effect
produced by weights in a balance’’ (G 7:389/L 696). In any soul in which there are
two competing desires that cannot both be satisﬁed, the strongest desire—that for
the greatest apparent good—prevails, just as the heaviest weight tips the balance. In
Theodicy 325, Leibniz develops this account using a different physical analogy,
which illustrates why, of a plurality of simultaneous endeavors toward different
goods, only one determines the soul to act:
As very often there are several courses to choose from, one might, instead of the
balance, compare the soul with a force which puts forth effort on various sides
simultaneously, but which acts only at the spot it ﬁnds easiest or where there is
least resistance. For instance, air if it is compressed too ﬁrmly in a glass vessel will
break it in order to escape. It exerts force on every part, but ﬁnally pounces upon
the weakest. Thus do the inclinations of the soul extend over all the goods that
present themselves: they are antecedent acts of will; but the consequent will,
which is their result, is determined in the direction of that which is most inﬂuential [ce qui touche le plus]. (G 6:309/H 322)

Leibniz defends spontaneity at this second stage, then, by appeal to a natural
operation of the soul, whereby the strongest desire—that for the greatest apparent
good—determines the will by which the soul acts. This does not mean that reason
always prevails over appetite, or that the greatest good as such is always chosen.
Leibniz claims only that the will acts in pursuit of the greatest apparent good,
which tracks the good more closely in proportion to the distinctness of the soul’s
perceptions.
Leibniz’s theory of the will offers the basis for an explanation of agent
spontaneity. According to Leibniz, the state of the soul at any time is characterized
by a complex array of perceptions, at least some of which represent objects as
goods. Associated with the latter perceptions are desires for those goods. Competition among the soul’s desires terminates in its acting in pursuit of the greatest
apparent good, and this act in turn produces a spontaneous change in its state.
Consistent with the notion of agent spontaneity, changes of this sort are distinguished by the fact that the soul determines itself to act on the basis of its representations of goods. Thus, we can say that a soul exhibits agent spontaneity, if its
desire for some future good is effective in bringing about a change in its state, or,
equivalently, if the change in its state can be explained by appeal to the law of
desire teleology.27

170 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

The Uniﬁed Theory
The preceding account of agent spontaneity falls short of a general explanation of
the changes that occur in a monad’s states. Leibniz’s theory of the will depicts the
competition among a soul’s desires as culminating in an act, whereby the strongest
desire determines a motion toward the greatest apparent good. Such an account,
however, can make no deﬁnitive claim about the subsequent perceptual state of
the soul, for that depends not only on the soul’s effort to acquire a certain good but,
in addition, on the resistance it confronts, or the factors that oppose the exercise of
its will. Obviously, when we act to satisfy our desires, we sometimes fail to do so.
Arguably, such cases may still qualify as instances of agent spontaneity, since
whether or not we achieve the goods we desire, we nonetheless act to achieve them.
In other cases, though, this condition fails to be met. Often the soul is affected in
ways that seem to directly contradict the supposition that changes in its states result
from a desire for the good.
An example of this sort was proposed by Pierre Bayle as part of his critique of
Leibniz’s New System.28 A dog is happily eating and taking pleasure in its food. A
man comes up from behind and without warning strikes the dog on the back with a
stick. The dog’s pleasure immediately gives way to pain. As Bayle saw it, based on
the doctrine of preestablished harmony, Leibniz is committed to there being some
appetite that determines the dog’s soul to pass from a state of pleasure to a state of
pain, without it being inﬂuenced by anything external to it. But this cannot be true,
both because there is no appetite for the unpleasant and because the dog had no
way of knowing that it was about to be struck. From the perspective of the dog’s
present state, its subsequent state of pain is neither apparent nor a good.
Bayle interpreted this case as a counterexample to the doctrine of preestablished
harmony. Yet this assumes that Leibniz believed that every change in the state of the
dog’s soul can be explained as the consequence of an appetite or desire for what it
represents as a good. This assumption is by no means obvious, and in my view it
should be rejected. The lesson of Bayle’s dog, as I read it, is that if appetition is the
internal force, or endeavor, that explains the transition of the dog’s soul from a state
of pleasure to a state of pain, then that endeavor cannot operate in the same way as
volitional states such as desire. Appetition cannot be understood as functioning
according to the law of desire teleology, for there is no conceivable scenario under
which the dog would have represented its subsequent state of pain as a good relative
to its present state of pleasure.
Against this it might be objected that Leibniz’s own philosophy contains the
resources needed to explain how in Bayle’s example the change in the dog’s soul
can be understood as the product of a desire for its subsequent painful state.
Although the dog does not consciously desire to be in such a state, it might be
drawn to such a state by unconscious desires that confusedly represent the state as
a state of pleasure. Leibniz is well known for ascribing an important psychological
role to petites perceptions that represent objects unavailable to consciousness.
Among these are the objects of future perceptual states, since, in Leibniz’s view,
every monad contains ‘‘marks and traces’’ of its entire history. To the extent that the

Leibniz on Spontaneity

171

soul contains such representations, which are admittedly extremely obscure and
confused, one might infer that it also includes unconscious desires for the objects
represented in those future states. Thus, the objection concludes, there is nothing
amiss in thinking of the change in the dog’s soul as coming about in a way that is
consistent with the law of desire teleology.
I take the objection to concede the point that whenever a monad acts for an end
that it represents as desirable, or good, this end is perceived as a source of pleasure.
As Leibniz puts it, ‘‘in substances which are capable of pleasure and pain every
action is a move towards pleasure, every passion a move towards pain’’ (NE 2.21.72/
RB 210).29 Thus, if the change in the dog’s soul can be understood as occurring in
accordance with the law of desire teleology, the dog either must mistakenly perceive
its future pain as a sensation of pleasure, or it must perceive the painful sensation as
part of a larger state of affairs that promises a proportionally greater pleasure. But
neither of these descriptions is plausible. There is nothing in the sensation of pain as
such that could be misconstrued as a sensation of pleasure, so it is inconceivable
that the dog could have misperceived that sensation as in any way desirable.30
Accordingly, the objector must hold that what the dog’s soul represents as desirable
is the complex state of affairs of which its painful sensation is a part; that is, the dog
must obscurely represent the subsequent state of the universe as being so desirable
that it offsets the pain that it itself will experience as part of that state. Yet this, too, is
implausible. The objection trades on the intuition that the dog’s representation of
what is good, or desirable, includes in a confused way the desirability of the world as
a whole. However, if the perception of something as desirable is linked to its
perception as pleasurable, there is no reason to think that this is the case. Since the
dog’s soul lacks the power of reason by which it might form representations of
the goodness of things in general, its perceptions of the good as good are limited
to the circumstances affecting its own body. And these circumstances are ones that
it perceives as painful. Consequently, accepting that the dog’s soul does move from
a state of pleasure to a state of pain, the case must be interpreted as one in which the
law of desire teleology is violated and agent spontaneity fails.31
For Leibniz, this admission is consistent with the truth of monadic spontaneity. Although the case is one in which, relative to its point of view, the dog is
passive rather than active in the determination of the change in its state, any such
change is the product of appetitive forces internal to the soul. When the dog’s soul
moves from a state of pleasure to a state of pain, it does not function as a spontaneous agent, acting to bring about what it represents as the greatest good, but it
does undergo a spontaneous change of state, brought about by the appetitive forces
operating within it. In general, every change in the dog’s perceptual state can be
ascribed to the operation of appetitive forces, but only some such changes are ones
in which the dog’s soul acts spontaneously in pursuit of the greatest apparent good.
To draw this distinction in a compelling way requires separating the roles
played in Leibniz’s philosophy by, on the one hand, volitional states such as desire
and, on the other, the broader class of appetitions.32 Volitional states, which operate according to the law of desire teleology, reﬂect the standpoint of an individual agent. For any such agent, desire is endeavor for an object represented as a
good. Accordingly, the range of an agent’s desires is constrained by the soul’s power

172 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

of representation. Regardless of the intrinsic goodness of an object, if it is not
represented by the soul as good, there can be no desire for it. Assuming such desires
are present, they may or may not be effective in producing a change in the soul’s
state. If they are effective, and if the change in the soul’s state can be explained in
terms of an agent’s acting for the sake of the greatest apparent good, then that agent
acts spontaneously, or exhibits agent spontaneity.
Appetition operates in a fundamentally different way, which reﬂects the soul’s
representation of a complex physical world of bodies as opposed to its own ends.
There is, of course, a close relationship between these two sets of representations.
Included within my representation of the physical world is a representation of my
body, which deﬁnes the locus of my agency and for the sake of which I desire certain
goods. Furthermore, insofar as I act, I am able to bring about changes in my body’s
relation to other bodies. Clearly, though, my ability to affect the physical world in
this way is limited. Almost all of what I perceive to be changes in the physical world
come about independently of my will, or even in opposition to my will. If Leibniz’s
account is correct, however, the appetitions of my soul are responsible for bringing
about everything I perceive of the physical world, including representations of distant and microscopic events of which I am entirely unaware and which are in no way
apparent goods for me. What a monad’s appetitions track, therefore, is not a representation of the world from the standpoint of agency—a world of apparent goods—
but a representation of the world of physical events governed by mechanical laws.
Such a distinction forms the basis of Leibniz’s own response to Bayle’s
counterexample:
The crux of M. Bayle’s objection here is that we have no spontaneous inclination
towards what we ﬁnd unpleasant. I make a distinction: I admit this when we know
that something will displease us, but in this case the dog does not know. We must
also distinguish between the spontaneous and the voluntary. The principle of
change is in the dog, the disposition of its soul moves imperceptibly towards giving
it pain: but this is without its knowing, and without its wanting it. The representation of the present state of the universe in the dog’s soul produces in it the
representation of the subsequent state of the same universe, just as in the things
represented the preceding state actually produces the subsequent state of the
world. In a soul, the representation of causes are the causes of the representations of
effects. And since this subsequent state of the world includes the blow on the dog’s
body, the representation of that subsequent state in its soul includes the pain
which corresponds to that blow. (G 4:532–533/WF 78; Leibniz’s emphasis)33

According to Leibniz, the dog’s soul can pass spontaneously from a state of pleasure to a state of pain, because the sequence of its perceptions is determined not
by its representation of desirable ends, but by its representation of the causal history
of the universe. At any moment, the dog’s soul contains a representation of the
complete state of the physical world (though most of this is unconscious), and
consequently it contains representations of the causes of subsequent states of the
world. The causes that bring about future physical states are inﬁnitely diverse;
hence, so too are the tendencies of the soul’s perceptions to change, for in the soul,
the ‘‘representations of causes are the causes of the representations of effects.’’
Leibniz elaborates on this picture in Theodicy 403:

Leibniz on Spontaneity

173

The operation of spiritual automata, that is of souls, is not mechanical, but it
contains in the highest degree all that is beautiful in mechanism. The movements
which are developed in bodies are concentrated in the soul by representation as in
an ideal world, which expresses the laws of the actual world and their consequences, but with this difference from the perfect ideal world which is in God, that
most of the perceptions in the other substances are only confused. For it is plain
that every simple substance embraces the whole universe in its confused perceptions or sensations, and that the succession of these perceptions is regulated by the
particular nature of this substance, but in a manner which always expresses all of
universal nature; and every present perception leads to a new perception, just as
every movement that it represents leads to another movement. (G 6:356–357/H 365)

When Leibniz says that monadic perceptions tend of their own accord toward
new perceptions, what he means, most fundamentally, is that they tend toward the
representation of a new state of the physical universe. According to the thesis of
monadic spontaneity, the changes that occur in a monad’s perceptual states are
explained in terms of the operation of appetitive forces internal to those states.
However, the action of these forces, in turn, is explained in terms of their effectiveness in advancing the monad through successive representations of the complete state of the physical universe. In an important sense, therefore, Leibniz gives
explanatory priority to a notion of lawful change in the physical world, for it is in
terms of the latter that the effectiveness of appetitive forces is understood.34
Earlier, I suggested that appetitions operate according to the law of natural
teleology: they act so as to bring about what is objectively the best state for the
monad to be in next. How is this to be reconciled with the explanatory priority of
the physical? What, if anything, makes a subsequent state of the physical world
good, or desirable? From the standpoint of the agent or organism—the soul deﬁned
by the physical point of view of its body—the future state of the world may not be
desirable at all. Witness Bayle’s dog. From the point of view of God’s will, on the
other hand, it is always desirable, for the future state of the world is the best way of
continuing the physical universe, the best state for the universe to be in following
its present state. As it is this order that governs the development of a monad’s
perceptions, its appetitions collectively tend toward the representation of a physically optimal state of affairs—a state whose goodness is deﬁned in terms of considerations of lawfulness and order. On the reading defended here, there is no
general account of a monad’s appetitions as endeavors toward what it represents as
goods, that is, desirable ends or objects. Rather, explanatory priority is given to the
lawful evolution of the physical universe, and monadic perceptions tend toward
representations of whatever the next best state of the universe is.
Leibniz’s theory of agent spontaneity is developed against this backdrop. Agent
spontaneity presupposes the perspective of an agent, acting to achieve what it
represents as goods. The perspective of an agent is deﬁned by its powers of representation, which determine its relation to the physical world and the range of its
goods. On Leibniz’s account, human agency is understood to have both a rational
and a sensory component: there are intelligible goods represented by reason and
bodily goods represented by the senses. Desire is the power by which an agent
endeavors to achieve the things it represents as goods; and to the extent that desire

174

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

is effective in promoting the attainment of those goods (and its own perfection), an
agent acts spontaneously. Yet no ﬁnite agent can escape completely the limits of its
perspective. Consequently, no ﬁnite agent realizes the condition of perfect spontaneity. Whatever its degree of activity, it is always to some degree passive, or responsive
to the state of the physical world.
The importance of appetition for Leibniz is that it explains the source of this
passivity: the changes that occur in a soul’s representations in spite of its best efforts
to change the world. To the extent that a soul exhibits agent spontaneity, changes in
its perceptual states can be explained in terms of its effort to acquire what it represents as goods. Such cases, however, constitute a relatively small proportion of the
changes that occur in most monads’ perceptual states. For the most part, such
changes occur without any effort of will or even in opposition to the will, when the
world is represented as resisting the soul’s efforts to change it. In such cases, the soul’s
passivity, or submission to external causes, is accounted for by the operation of
appetition, which spontaneously leads to new representations of the physical world,
independently of what the soul represents as its own volitions, or efforts of will.
For Leibniz, this complex interplay of activity and passivity is worked out
within the conﬁnes of preestablished harmony, according to which there occurs
no real interaction between soul and world. At the deepest level, there is only a
correlation between two series of perceptions, each evolving according to its own
laws. How we characterize perceptual change is a subtle matter for Leibniz.
Leibniz ascribes all of the changes that occur in a soul’s perceptual states to the
operation of appetitive forces, which act according to the ‘‘laws of ﬁnal causes’’ (G
6:620/AG 223). On the account presented here, however, it is necessary to distinguish among these endeavors, based on whether they function merely as appetitions, leading the monad toward new representations of the physical world, or
as desires for apparent goods. In the ﬁrst case, change is explained in terms of the
law of natural teleology, whereby the soul endeavors to achieve what is (from the
perspective of God) the next best state of the universe. In the second case, change is
explained in terms of the law of desire teleology, according to which the soul
endeavors to achieve what it represents as the greatest good. Noteworthy about this
distinction is that it is drawn entirely in terms of the content of a monad’s perceptions, and that in the ﬁrst case the relevant content is simply the successive states
of the physical world.35 Given this, Leibniz is able to retain the commonsense
distinction between the soul’s activity and passivity: its acting on and being acted on
by an external world. In terms of their content, only volitional states involve the
soul’s acting for the sake of apparent goods; hence they alone correlate with the
notion of agent spontaneity.

Spontaneity and Freedom
In a 1704 letter to Lady Masham, Leibniz writes: ‘‘freedom requires that we act
with spontaneity and with choice; my system augments our spontaneity and does
not diminish our choice’’ (G 3:364).36 Leibniz’s reason for claiming that his system
augments our spontaneity is that on his account—that of Theodicy 288—every

Leibniz on Spontaneity

175

change in a substance’s states occurs spontaneously, as the result of forces internal
to it. Leibniz saw an important relation between this thesis of monadic spontaneity
and the preservation of freedom, which he associated with a substance’s independence from the effects of external causes. This point is highlighted in Theodicy
300–301:
[T]he establishment of this system [of preestablished harmony] demonstrates beyond a doubt that in the course of nature each substance is the sole cause of all its
actions, and that it is free of all physical inﬂuences from every other substance,
save the customary cooperation of God. And this system shows that our spontaneity is real, and not only apparent. . . .
The spontaneity of our actions can therefore no longer be questioned; and
Aristotle has deﬁned it well, saying that an action is spontaneous when its source is
in him who acts. . . . Thus it is that our actions and our will depend entirely upon
us. (G 6:295–296/H 309–310)

In linking spontaneity to an agent’s power of self-determination, Leibniz allies
himself with a philosophical tradition stretching back to Aristotle. According to this
tradition, an agent acts spontaneously when it is the source or principle of its own
action—a self-mover—as opposed to being constrained to act by external causes.
Yet Leibniz fails to establish in a sufﬁciently clear way the connection between this
idea and the thesis of monadic spontaneity. It is worth recalling that monadic
spontaneity does not enter Leibniz’s system through an analysis of the problem of
freedom; rather, the thesis is a consequence of answers Leibniz gives to a set of
fundamental metaphysical questions concerning change, causation, unity, and
identity. Only after answers to these questions have been given does he attempt to link
spontaneity, so conceived, to the issue of freedom.37
When Leibniz explicitly addresses the problem of freedom the relevance of
monadic spontaneity is far from obvious. In Theodicy 34, there is the following
characteristic airing of the issues:
I am of the opinion that our will is exempt not only from constraint but also from
necessity. Aristotle has already observed that there are two things in freedom,
namely, spontaneity and choice, and therein lies our mastery over our actions.
When we act freely we are not being forced, as would happen if we were pushed
on to a precipice and thrown from top to bottom; and we are not prevented from
having the mind free when we deliberate, as would happen if we were given a
draught to deprive us of discernment. There is contingency in a thousand actions
of nature; but when there is no judgment in him who acts there is no freedom. (G
6:122/H 143)

Here Leibniz appears to locate three potential threats to freedom. The ﬁrst is an
incapacity of our judgment, or a lack of freedom of deliberation. This impinges
directly on our power of choice, or our ‘‘mastery over our actions.’’ The other two
threats, which are not clearly distinguished, are related to the condition of spontaneity. One of these is the ever-present specter of necessity: spontaneity (and
hence freedom) presupposes the contingency of our actions. The other is the
classic problem of physical constraint—as Leibniz puts it, that ‘‘we are not being
forced, as would happen if we were pushed on to a precipice and thrown from top

176 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

to bottom.’’ In neither of the latter two cases does monadic spontaneity respond
directly to the underlying worry. With respect to the ﬁrst problem, it is essential for
Leibniz to be able to argue that monadic spontaneity is consistent with the contingency of our actions. This I have claimed he is able to do, and consequently the
threat of metaphysical necessity can be repelled. At the same time, monadic
spontaneity is not entailed by the solution to this problem. Leibniz’s solution, the
doctrine of hypothetical necessity, is consistent with a variety of causal theories,
including ones in which at least some of substance’s states are caused by the
actions of external substances. In the second case, the challenge is to distinguish
ordinary instances of unconstrained action from special circumstances in which
the exercise of our will is constrained or preempted by external causes. Monadic
spontaneity addresses this concern by maintaining that we are never acted on by
external causes; everything that happens to us is the product of actions internal to
our soul. But this has the effect of rendering the phenomenon of constraint
nonexistent, contrary to our intuition that there is a signiﬁcant distinction between
constrained and unconstrained action. Once again, we confront the criticism that
in generalizing the notion of spontaneity to cover any change in a soul-like substance, Leibniz severs spontaneity’s relation to freedom.
I have argued that Leibniz has the resources to construct a more promising
account of spontaneity—agent spontaneity—that meets this objection. The answer, in a nutshell, is found in a sentence from Theodicy 64: ‘‘All that happens to
the soul depends upon it, but it does not always depend upon its will; that would be
too much’’ (G 6:137). In order to make sense of the idea of agent spontaneity, it is
necessary to preserve the distinction between a substance’s active and passive states:
those in which it acts to bring about changes in its own states and those in which
such changes are ascribed to external causes. I have shown that Leibniz has a way
of preserving this distinction within the framework of preestablished harmony,
which itself rests on the doctrine of monadic spontaneity.
Monadic spontaneity thus serves as the metaphysical foundation for Leibniz’s
treatment of freedom, but it is not the notion he requires in order to deﬁne the
concept of freedom. This is made clear in his most careful treatment of the topic in
the New Essays.38 Given the presence of a will that acts for the sake of the greatest
apparent good, Leibniz distinguishes two principal kinds of freedom and two
associated forms of constraint. The ﬁrst is the ‘‘freedom to do,’’ or ‘‘the power to do
what one wills.’’ Agent spontaneity is sufﬁcient for the possession of this freedom,
provided that an agent has the use of those things customarily in her power, above
all, the free use of her body. Such freedom is blocked by physical constraint, or the
action of external causes that preempt the spontaneous operation of her will.
The second kind of freedom is the ‘‘freedom to will’’ or ‘‘the power to will as
one should.’’39 For Leibniz, this is freedom in the morally relevant sense. In reasoning about this freedom, he writes: ‘‘the question is not whether a man can do
what he wills to do but whether his will itself is sufﬁciently independent’’ (NE
2.22.21/RB 181). For one’s will to be free in this sense, it is necessary that one exercise
a will, or that one act for the sake of the greatest apparent good. However, it is not
necessary that one have the means to render one’s will effective. The critical factor
instead is the form of one’s will, namely, whether it is governed by intelligence, or a

Leibniz on Spontaneity

177

distinct knowledge of the good. In rational beings, such freedom is blocked by moral
(i.e., psychological) constraint, or the ‘‘bondage of the will’’: the inner constraint of
the passions, which oppose the determination of choice by intelligence.
To the extent that nonrational beings act to satisfy desires, they exhibit agent
spontaneity; they act for the sake of the greatest apparent good. Lacking intelligence, however, such beings are incapable of freedom in the morally relevant
sense. To attain ‘‘a mastery over one’s actions,’’ it is necessary to possess intelligence, on the basis of which one is able to deliberate and choose. In creatures with
the capacity for choice, freedom in this sense is limited by the degree to which
one’s ends are set by confused thoughts or passions rather than a distinct knowledge of the good: ‘‘we may say that we are immune from bondage in so far as we
act with a distinct knowledge, but that we are the slaves of passions in so far as our
perceptions are confused’’ (G 6:288/H 303). Nevertheless, whether slaves of our
passions or masters of ourselves, we act spontaneously, provided that we act for the
sake of the greatest apparent good.

Notes
My thanks to Jan Cover, Michael Futch, Matthew Kisner, Wayne Martin, Sam Rickless, and Eric
Watkins for their comments on previous versions of this essay.
1. According to Spinoza, freedom is the state in which an agent ‘‘complies with no one’s wishes
but his own’’ (CSW 584). This occurs only if he is the ‘‘adequate cause’’ of changes in him or outside
him—which he is only if he is led by reason alone and not by the passions. See Ethics IIIP3, IVP66S,
and IVP68D.
2. Critique of Pure Reason, A 445/B 473, A 553/B 561; Critique of Practical Reason (Ak 5:96–97).
3. In an undated text, Leibniz deﬁnes ‘freedom’ as ‘‘the spontaneity of an intelligent being,’’ and
‘spontaneity’ as ‘‘contingency without constraint [coactione], that is, the spontaneous is that which is
neither necessary nor constrained. . . . That is constrained whose principle is external’’ (G 7:108). Later in
the same piece he writes, ‘‘The more anything is determined by itself, the more spontaneous or (if it is
intelligent) free it is; the more it is determined from elsewhere, the more it is subject [servit] or
constrained [coactum]’’ (G 7:109).
4. In a 1711 letter to Des Bosses, Leibniz writes: ‘‘I certainly maintain that a power of determining
oneself without any cause, or without any ground of determination, implies a contradiction . . . but from this
the metaphysical necessity of all effects does not follow. For it sufﬁces that the cause or reason not
necessitate metaphysically, although it is metaphysically necessary that there be some such cause’’ (G 2:420).
5. See T 65, 400; NE 2.21.72/RB 210; G 3:403/AG 195.
6. This objection is noted by both Murray and Greenberg in their essays in this volume.
7. According to Leibniz, ‘‘there is no real spontaneity in a mass. . . . [S]trictly speaking, what is
spontaneous is the entelechy’’ (G 4:558/WF 111–112). Any soul-like substance, or monad, has an entelechy, form, or ‘‘primitive force.’’ This leaves the question of how to account for the apparent spontaneity
exhibited by bodies. One answer is that some of these bodies (animated organic bodies) are substances
in their own right, whose unity and activity are ascribed to their substantial forms. Another answer is that
a reductive analysis of body terminates in an account of it as consisting solely of monads. See C 13–14/
MP 175; G 7:502.
8. Leibniz explains the harmony between soul and body in terms of the relation of ‘‘ideal causation’’: ‘‘[O]ne may give a true and philosophic sense to the mutual dependence which we suppose
between the soul and the body. It is that the one of these two substances depends upon the other ideally,
in so far as the reason of that which is done in the one can be furnished by that which is in the other.
This had already happened when God ordered beforehand the harmony that there would be between
them’’ (T 66/G 6:138/H 158–159).

178 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
9. See T 65, 290.
10. In the New System, Leibniz claims that preestablished harmony ‘‘has this great advantage, that
instead of saying that we are free only in appearance and in a way sufﬁcient for practical purposes . . . we
are determined only in appearance, and that, in rigorously metaphysical language, we have a perfect
independence relative to the inﬂuence of every other creature’’ (G 4:485/AG 144). I have argued that this
independence is inadequate for freedom in the morally relevant sense. For that agent spontaneity is
required. But agent spontaneity, no less than physical constraint, is deﬁned relative to a soul’s representational states. So does that mean that Leibniz is committed to the position that we are free ‘‘only
in appearance’’? As will become clear, the answer is no: a soul is ‘‘physically constrained’’ by what it
represents as the actions of external things on it; however, its spontaneous acts are effects of its own
power (and not merely representations of its power).
11. The doctrine of divine concurrence, to which Leibniz assents, raises problems that I cannot
tackle here. For an attempt to do so, see Sleigh 1990: 183–185.
12. There is room for only a brief sketch of the steps Leibniz takes in reaching this conclusion.
Among his primary deﬁnitions is that of one thing being a sufﬁcient condition, or inferens, of another:
‘‘If with A supposed to exist, it follows that B exists (although not at the same time), A will be an inferens,
B, an illatum’’ (A 6.4:563). Conversely, any inferens is said to be conditioned by that for which it is a
sufﬁcient condition: ‘‘If with B supposed not to exist, it follows that A does not exist, B will be a
condition, A, a conditioned’’ (A 6.4:563). To these he adds the notion of one thing’s being prior by nature
to another: ‘‘If a condition is prior by nature to a conditioned, then it will be said to be a requisite
[requisitum], and the conditioned will be called a requirens’’ (A 6.4:563). On the basis of these deﬁnitions, Leibniz offers the following account of one’s things being a full cause, or predeterminant, of
another: ‘‘A full cause is an inferens prior by nature to an illatum, or that which involves all the requisites
sufﬁcient for it (i.e. that from which all the remaining requisites follow). Here it should be noted that
whatever involves all the requisities of some means of producing also involves all the requisites of the
thing to be produced. . . . From this it is evident that it is not necessary that a cause and an effect exist at
the same time, nor that they not exist at the same time. Moreover, just as a full cause is speciﬁed with
respect to a requisite, or a condition prior by nature, so a determinant is speciﬁed with respect to some
condition. For that is a determinant which involves all the conditions of that which is determined, and
consequently a predeterminant, or a determinant prior by nature, is a full cause. It is obvious, too, that
an inferens and a determinant are exactly the same; but an inferens prior by nature can be said to be a
predeterminant, or a full cause’’ (A 6.4:563–564). The deﬁnitional studies in which these ideas are
worked out are discussed in greater detail in Rutherford 1995a: chap. 5 and Futch 2001.
13. The latter claim may seem to go beyond the former, since one can imagine cases of concurrent
causation (or of causal overdetermination) where it is true both that a substance acts on itself to produce
changes in its states and that those changes are the effects of the actions of other substances on it.
Leibniz offers independent arguments against the latter possibility that he appeals to in defending the
thesis of monadic spontaneity. See the passages from the Monadology cited in the next paragraph of the
main text.
14. Earlier I say that force involves an endeavor or striving for future states; here Leibniz says, an
endeavor or striving towards actions. Since ‘action’ and ‘passion’ are deﬁned as species of change, i.e., an
aggregate of contradictory states (A 6.4:556; C 9/MP 134), an endeavor toward action is an endeavor
toward a state incompatible with the substance’s present state.
15. Compare Sleigh: ‘‘But the texts are curiously vague about the character of the relation between a
state of a substance and its predecessor, in virtue of which, according to Leibniz, the former is a consequence of the latter’’ (Sleigh, Chappell, and Della Rocca 1998: 1263).
16. Cover and O’Leary-Hawthorne 1999: chap. 6 defend a version of the former; Kulstad 1990 a
version of the latter. See also Bobro and Clatterbaugh 1996.
17. Evidence of this idea can be found in texts as early as 1676. See Rutherford 1995a: 148–154.
18. I interpret the content of a monad’s perceptual state and the tendency of that state to change (its
‘‘appetition’’) as properties of the same state. Compare the following passage from a 1706 letter to
Christian Wolff: ‘‘In truth, whatever is in the soul may be understood generally to be reduced to two
things: the soul’s harmonious expression, in accordance with its body, of the present state of external
things, and the endeavor [tendentia] to a new expression that represents the endeavor of bodies (or

Leibniz on Spontaneity

179

external things) to a future state, in a word, perception and tending toward perception [perceptionem et
percepturitionem]’’ (GLW 56).
19. See, e.g., T 396.
20. This conclusion is supportive of Sleigh’s interpretation of the doctrine of spontaneity as it
ﬁgures in the Arnauld correspondence: ‘‘Throughout the texts from our period it is clear that the series
of states, constituting the history of an individual substance, must be generated by a relation of causality,
applied to its initial state’’ (1990: 129).
21. A similar suggestion is advanced by Jolley (1998: 611, n. 14).
22. In addition to the law of the series that encompasses the complete history of any monad’s states,
Leibniz appeals to general laws that govern transitions between these states. Consistent with the analysis
presented here, one state follows from another relative to a certain ‘‘mode of producing,’’ articulated in
the relevant general law. And Leibniz insists that such laws themselves are contingent (DM 13; NE 2.21.13/
RB 178–179). On this point, see Kulstad 1990: 139–142, and note 25 below.
23. ‘‘The action of the internal principle which brings about the change or passage from one
perception to another can be called appetition’’ (Mon 15/AG 215).
24. I use ‘will’ in the sense of what Leibniz calls ‘volition’: ‘‘the effort or endeavour (conatus) to
move towards what one ﬁnds good and away from what one ﬁnds bad, the endeavour arising immediately out of one’s awareness of those things’’ (NE 2.21.5/RB 172). As Kulstad notes (1990: 147), Leibniz is
not entirely consistent in this usage, since he also characterizes volitions in terms of our awareness of the
endeavor itself as opposed to its object: ‘‘desires and endeavours of which we are aware are often called
‘volitions’ . . . whether or not they prevail and take effect’’ (NE 2.21.39/RB 192).
25. The contingency of acts of will (including acts of free will) is defended by Leibniz in the same
way as the contingency of modal change in general. Such acts follow from causes that are sufﬁcient,
relative to the appropriate laws, to determine them. This is just what it means to say that the soul’s
motives ‘‘incline without necessitating’’: ‘‘the event has nothing in it to render it necessary and to suggest
that no other thing might have happened in its stead. And as for the connection between causes and
effects, it only inclined, without necessitating the free agency, as I have just explained; thus it does
not produce even a hypothetical necessity, save in conjunction with something from outside, namely,
this very maxim, that the prevailing inclination always triumphs’’ (T 53; G 6:131–132/H 152). See NE
2.21.8/RB 175; 2.21.13/RB 178–179. I believe this account is consistent with Adams’s reading, defended in
this volume, of Leibniz’s doctrine of moral necessity; for a dissenting view, see Murray’s essay in this
volume.
26. Leviathan, chap. 6.
27. Following Leibniz, we can also describe such changes as ‘‘endeavors towards perfection’’ (RB
210). ‘‘Goodness or striving [appetitio] for the good is the perfection of the will’’ (T cd18/G 6:441), which
leads any created substance towards a state of greater perfection.
28. Dictionnaire historique et critique, article ‘‘Rorarius,’’ Note H. The passage is translated in WF
73–74.
29. See also T 289: ‘‘In truth, we will only that which pleases us’’ (G 6:289/H 303). Against this,
there is one passage in the New Essays where Leibniz characterizes desire more broadly, in a way that
does not presuppose an awareness of ‘‘actual pleasure or suffering’’ (2.21.39/RB 192).
30. Here the objector may reply that what the dog misperceives is not the sensation of pain but the
bodily effects of being struck. This might mean either that the dog correctly (but obscurely) perceives
the damage done to its body but incorrectly perceives it as associated with a sensation of pleasure, or
that it misperceives the effects of being struck and therefore misperceives them as pleasurable. The ﬁrst
alternative is ruled out by Leibniz’s psychological theory. Although one may have a mistaken belief
that such-and-such bodily state is correlated with such-and-such mental state, there is no way to prize
apart one’s perception of a bodily state and one’s affective response to that perception. They are aspects
of the same mental state. On the second alternative, we are meant to imagine that the dog’s perceptions
misrepresent the future state in which it is struck as a beneﬁcial, pleasure-producing state as opposed to
a harmful, pain-producing state. Since there is nothing special about the case in question, this would
require supposing a systematic error in the dog’s perceptual apparatus, such that at the level of petites
perceptions harmful bodily effects were routinely represented as beneﬁcial ones. This is surely too high
a price to pay.

180 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
31. A different answer could be given in the case of a rational agent. Since such an agent has
the capacity to form an idea of the goodness of things in general, based on a conception of their
metaphysical or moral perfection, and since pleasure is just ‘‘the perception of perfection,’’ it is conceivable that such an agent might (consciously or unconsciously) desire a state in which the pain
associated with the condition of its body was outweighed by the pleasure it took in the perfection of the
universe. This, I claim, is inconceivable in the case of an agent, such as a dog, that lacks reason.
32. Leibniz himself highlights this distinction: ‘‘There are other efforts, arising from insensible
perceptions, which we are not aware of; I prefer to call these ‘appetitions’ rather than volitions, for one
describes as ‘voluntary’ only actions one can be aware of and can reﬂect upon when they arise from
some consideration of good and bad’’ (NE 2.21.5/RB 173).
33. In notes on the same article as it appears in the second edition of Bayle’s Dictionnaire, Leibniz
uses the example of a man stung by an insect while eating jam (G 4:546–547/WF 103).
34. Of course, strictly speaking, there is no physical universe over and above the system of
phenomena represented in monadic perceptions.
35. In comments on Lamy’s De la Connoissance de soi-même, Leibniz explicitly frames the
distinction as one between the order of efﬁcient causes and the order of ﬁnal causes: ‘‘perceptions which
express the laws of motion are linked together just like those laws, which they express according to
the order of efﬁcient causes. But the order of voluntary perceptions, which is that of ﬁnal causes, is in
conformity with the nature of the will’’ (G 4:580/WF 155).
36. A similar comment appears in a letter to Jaquelot from the same year (G 3:471).
37. See, e.g., the conclusion of the New System (G 4:485/AG 144).
38. At NE 2.21.8, beginning ‘‘The term ‘freedom’ is highly ambiguous’’ (RB 175). On the forms
of constraint, see NE 2.21.13/RB 179.
39. Leibniz also characterizes it as ‘‘freedom of mind’’ or ‘‘self-mastery.’’ See NE 2.21.8/RB 175;
T 289/G 6:288–289.

9

Moral Necessity
ROBERT MERRIHEW ADAMS

eibniz frequently describes free decisions as ‘‘morally necessary’’ but not

L ‘‘metaphysically necessary.’’ This way of speaking is characteristic of Leibniz’s

Theodicy; more generally, it is especially frequent in writings from the last ten years
of his life. That is particularly true of the historically pivotal application of the
concept to God. Gaston Grua, who knew the texts as well as anyone in the twentieth
century has known them, said that to his knowledge, it was only in 1707 that Leibniz
began to speak of actions of God as ‘‘morally necessary’’ (Grua 1953: 234–235). In
those last years, however, God’s choices join those of the virtuous sage as paradigms
of the morally necessary for Leibniz; ‘‘it must be said that God, that the sage, is
carried to the best by a moral necessity’’ (T 132). But such claims do not stop there;
strange as it may seem, the category of moral necessity is extended in some passages
to all voluntary choices, even sinful ones.1
Leibniz’s Jesuit friend Des Bosses got him to agree in correspondence in 1711,
the year after the Theodicy was published, that he should not say ‘‘that there was a
moral necessity of sinning in Adam or in anyone else,’’ and that ‘‘it is better never
to acknowledge a moral necessity except to [do] good.’’2 This private concession
has limited credibility, however; Leibniz linked it with the comment that he
would prefer his words in general to be interpreted in such a way ‘‘that nothing
bad sounding follows’’ (G 2:420). And in the last months of his life we ﬁnd
Leibniz speaking to Clarke of ‘‘a necessity which is moral, whereby [not only] a
wise being chooses the best, [but] every mind follows the strongest inclination’’
(LC 5.4).
What metaphysical necessity is for Leibniz we know pretty well. It is the
type of necessity on which most ink has been spilled by his interpreters—an
absolute necessity whose mark, for Leibniz, is that the negation of what is metaphysically necessary implies a contradiction. It is harder to say what he means by
moral necessity, and that is the main subject of this essay. It is one that seems to me
to have some intrinsic philosophical interest, whether or not the idea of moral
necessity will go as far as we might like it to as interpretation of Leibniz.
181

182 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Leibniz found the expression ‘moral necessity’ used extensively in the jurisprudence of his time (as documented in Grua 1953: 222–226). In jurisprudence the
expression typically meant obligation; it expressed the strongest modality in deontic
logic. In previous writing on this subject I have interpreted ‘moral necessity’ as
having that meaning in Leibniz. That was also Samuel Clarke’s interpretation; he
took a moral necessity of doing good to mean no more than ‘‘that a good Being,
continuing to be Good, cannot do Evil,’’ and complained, with some plausibility,
that a necessity of that sort was not relevant to a dispute about freedom and
determinism (G 7:423). Leibniz gives deﬁnitions that leave no doubt that he
sometimes uses ‘moral necessity’ in this deontic, jurisprudential sense (A 6.1:465;
Grua 608). Michael Murray (1996: 47–48) has argued, however, that Leibniz also
uses the expression in another, metaphysically richer way, and in particular that he
does so in the Theodicy; and I am persuaded that Murray is right about that. In this
richer sense, to say that a decision is morally necessary is not merely to say that
it ought to be made; it is to say something by way of explaining how and why it
is made.
Murray points out that the terminology of moral necessity had been used in
such an explanatory sense by several Catholic theologians, mostly Spanish Jesuits,
in the seventeenth century, beginning with Diego Ruiz de Montoya (1562–1632)
and Diego Granado (1571–1632), and that Leibniz acknowledged acquaintance
with the work of some of them.3 Ruiz and Granado developed a theory according
to which a free choice—for instance, a choice of a perceived good—is neither
metaphysically nor physically necessary, but is morally necessary, in view of the
agent’s inclinations and perceptions of value. That this is an important part of the
background to Leibniz’s thought about free will is highly plausible. Murray, and
Sven Knebel (1991a, 1992), have been bringing to light a current of seventeenthcentury, mainly Jesuit, philosophical theology that is very interesting and deserves to
be better known than it has been. It was certainly known to Leibniz, and provided
precedents for some aspects of his thought, including his ‘‘optimism.’’
Nonetheless, I think we cannot rely very heavily on the Jesuits for the content
of our interpretation of Leibniz’s views on freedom, for several reasons. (1) My most
general reason for this caution is that Leibniz seems to me a remarkably learned
writer, but not a very scholarly one. He is generally eager to present himself as
agreeing with other writers, but seems to care much less whether he agrees with
them in precisely the sense intended by them. (2) He often cites by memory, and
his appreciative mention of these Jesuit authors tends to be accompanied by disclaimers of current or extensive knowledge of their writings (G 2:362, 366, 436,
450). (3) There are possible disagreements to be considered between Leibniz and
his Jesuit precursors. In particular, we may wonder whether Leibniz agrees with
Ruiz and Granado in opposing moral necessity to physical necessity, or only to
metaphysical necessity—a point discussed by Murray to which I shall soon return.
(4) There are also signiﬁcant differences in the development of the idea of moral
necessity by different seventeenth-century theologians, as Knebel and Murray
make clear, so that even if we suppose Leibniz to be agreeing with views of theirs,
there will remain a question as to which version of the views he has adopted. For
these reasons, and because I think I see how to do it in a way that may be interesting,

Moral Necessity

183

I will try simply to ﬁt to the texts of Leibniz some speculations about moral
necessity.

Moral and Physical Necessity
It is certainly not only to metaphysical necessity that moral necessity is opposed in
Leibniz’s thought. The competition here is among answers to questions of the form
‘‘Why is it certain, or determined, that p?’’ The ‘‘machinery,’’ so to speak, of determination and explanation invoked by the competing conceptions is quite different: formal or logical implication and contradiction in the case of metaphysical
necessity; ‘‘ﬁnal causes,’’ as Leibniz calls them, in the case of moral necessity. But
these are not the only relevant alternatives; moral necessity is opposed to any valuefree mechanism determining choice.
One passage in which Leibniz appears to oppose moral necessity to physical
necessity, or at any rate to physical causation, is particularly illuminating. Arguing
against Thomas Hobbes, Leibniz writes:
M. Hobbes is no more willing to admit talk of a moral necessity, because in effect
everything happens by physical causes. But there is reason, nonetheless, to make a
big distinction between the necessity that obliges the wise to do good, which
is called moral, and which has a place even in relation to God, and that blind
necessity by which Epicurus, Strato, Spinoza, and perhaps M. Hobbes have believed that things exist without intelligence and without choice, and consequently
without God, who in effect would not be needed according to them, since according to that necessity everything would exist by its own essence, as necessarily as
two plus three must make ﬁve. And that necessity is absolute, because everything it
carries with it must happen, whatever one does; whereas what happens by a hypothetical necessity happens in consequence of the supposition that this or that has
been foreseen or resolved, or done in advance; and moral necessity carries an
obligation of reason, which always has its effect in the wise. This species of necessity
is happy and desirable, when one is carried by good reasons to act as one does; but
necessity blind and absolute would overturn piety and morality. (T h3)

Moral necessity is opposed in this passage both to ‘‘physical causes’’ and to an
‘‘absolute necessity’’ of which mathematical necessity is an example, though
Leibniz is not at pains here to distinguish these alternatives to moral necessity. What
is most important to Leibniz, I believe, about the types of necessity opposed here is
that they are all blind necessity, necessity that operates ‘‘without intelligence and
without choice.’’ Moral necessity is not blind; in its operation ‘‘one is carried by
good reasons to act as one does.’’
Another important mention of ‘‘blind necessity’’ in the Theodicy comes in a
discussion of Spinoza, who, according to Leibniz, ‘‘appears to have explicitly taught
a blind necessity, having denied to the author of things understanding and will, and
imagining that good and perfection relate only to us and not to him’’ (T 173).
Particularly signiﬁcant in this comment is the clear indication that ‘‘good and
perfection’’ will play an essential part in any pattern of determination and explanation that avoids blind necessity. Value has explanatory force in the Leibnizian

184

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

scheme of things. The best of all possible worlds is chosen and actualized because it
is the best, and Leibniz even implies that God exists because God is the most perfect
possible being (see Adams 1994: 164–76).
This is connected, I believe, with the idea of ﬁnal causes, whose soundness
and importance Leibniz fervently and persistently advocated. In ﬁnal causation, as
conceived by Leibniz, something is done, or occurs, because of the value, or
apparent value, of an end that is an object of choice or appetition.4 Final causes are
presented by Leibniz, in a central metaphysical context, as opposed to causes that
we might call physical. It will be important to remember that our sense of ‘physical’ is narrower than its usual sense in Leibniz’s lifetime. Our sense may be close
to what Leibniz meant in speaking about ‘‘physical causes’’ in the passage about
Hobbes that I quoted; but he usually speaks of ‘‘bodies’’ where we might speak of
the ‘‘physical,’’ and it is efﬁcient causes and the realm of bodies that are opposed to
ﬁnal causes in a particularly interesting section of his ﬁnal letter to Clarke:
All the natural forces of bodies are subject to mechanical laws, and all the natural
forces of minds are subject to moral laws. The former follow the order of efﬁcient
causes, and the latter follow the order of ﬁnal causes. The former operate without
liberty, like a watch; the latter are exercised with liberty. . . . (LC 5.124)5

Though moral necessity is not mentioned in this section, this is the same letter in
which Leibniz says it is by moral necessity that ‘‘every mind follows the strongest
inclination’’ (LC 5.4). We may surely infer that ‘‘moral laws’’ and ‘‘the order of
ﬁnal causes’’ are the way in which Leibniz thinks moral necessity works.
The contrast between efﬁcient and ﬁnal causes is one of Leibniz’s ways of
characterizing one of the most fundamental distinctions in his system, that between monads and bodies. In section 79 of the Monadology he says:
Souls act according to the laws of ﬁnal causes by appetitions, ends, and means.
Bodies act according to the laws of efﬁcient causes or of motions. And the two realms,
that of efﬁcient causes and that of ﬁnal causes, are harmonious with each other.

In this text ‘‘the laws of efﬁcient causes or of motions’’ are surely the laws of
Leibniz’s mechanistic physics. And while only ‘‘souls’’ are mentioned here on the
other side, Leibniz’s system of preestablished harmony surely requires that all
monads or simple substances be included in the ‘‘realm of ﬁnal causes’’—the more
so inasmuch as the internal causal structure of all monads is supposed to work by
‘‘appetitions,’’ which we must certainly understand teleologically. I do not know of
a text in which Leibniz explicitly applies the concept of moral necessity or moral
laws to the actions of subrational monads; perhaps he would not and should not.
But the difference between moral necessity and whatever necessity determines the
operations of humbler monads can hardly be one of the most fundamental differences in his system; for the appetitions of the humblest monads are conceived by
analogy with conscious human purposiveness, and even in our own case ‘‘an
inﬁnity’’ of factors of which we are not conscious is apt to be involved in the ﬁnal
cause of our actions (Mon 36).
The idea on which I think it may be most interesting to focus in trying to
understand what Leibniz says about moral necessity and ﬁnal causation is this: that

Moral Necessity

185

the value or apparent value of an end, or some analogue of apparent value, is
sufﬁcient of itself to determine the action of a substance. God chooses the best just
because it is the best, other minds choose the apparent best just because it is the
apparent best, and even the humblest monad does something analogous. In relation to minds, it would be claimed that the ‘‘moral laws’’ are strong enough to
determine choice infallibly in advance. Sure as the moral laws are to be followed,
however, there would be no logical incoherence in a mind’s failing to follow them;
the choice is in that sense not metaphysically necessary. And there is no value-free
mechanism that makes the mind obey the moral laws; the choice is in that sense
not physically necessary. The boldest form of this thesis would be one in which it is
denied that facts of value can be reduced to anything metaphysically more fundamental, but I will not venture here into the complex topic of Leibniz’s views
about the metaphysical structure of facts of value.
An account in which the value or apparent value of an end is ‘‘sufﬁcient
of itself’’ to determine the action of a substance is one in which there is no further
mechanism to explain how ﬁnal causation works.6 In any system or pattern of explanation it seems there will be a bottom layer, at which, at least in practice,
explanation comes to an end. In typically modern patterns of efﬁcient causal
explanation, the most general laws of nature are allowed to be part of such a
bottom layer. I take Leibniz to have supposed that ‘because it seemed to s to be the
best thing to do’ can function in that way as part of a bottom layer of explanation
and causation—a rock bottom ‘‘mechanism’’ of ﬁnal causation, so to speak. I don’t
think he thought there must be a further how here, a how simple substances choose
what seems to them best.7
It will hardly escape notice that the interpretation I have just sketched would
make Leibniz in one way a precursor of Kant’s theory of freedom. On Kant’s view,
freedom is a sort of causality, and as such requires a law. Its law is the moral law.
To be free is to able to do something just because the moral law requires it. Kant’s
view is less deterministic than Leibniz’s, however: Kant does not think the moral law
determines choice infallibly; we can and do violate it. Kant may seem less optimistic
than Leibniz at this point, and in some sense he is certainly a less optimistic philosopher; but we must bear in mind that the ‘‘moral laws’’ we all follow infallibly
according to Leibniz are much less ideal than the Kantian moral law, as they are
tailored to our very imperfect apprehension of the good.
It is time to focus on the deterministic aspect of Leibniz’s thought. In denying
that free actions are necessitated, he generally goes out of his way to say that it does
not follow that they are not determined. Indeed, as I have indicated, I think the
concept of moral necessity is supposed to play a part in explaining how free actions
are determined. I have suggested that they are supposed to be determined by the
value or apparent value, or something analogous to the apparent value, of an end;
and presumably the real value of an end plays at least a part in determining its
apparent value. But values can hardly work alone in determining an action. If
values can determine the action of a substance, that is because the substance is
sensitive to value, has the capacity to perceive and appreciate value to some degree,
and the capacity to pursue an end because of its perceived value, or an analogue
thereof—the capacity for value-oriented appetition.8 These capacities will be part

186 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

of the nature of the substance. Thus it seems that the action of the substance—
even the free action of a mind—will be determined jointly by its nature and the
values of the ends for which it could have appetition.
At this point in the argument we have returned to the relation between moral
and physical necessity. Only here it seems not to be a relation of opposition.
Rather, moral necessity seems likely to be subsumed under physical necessity. To
see why that is so, we must remember that in Leibniz’s time, ‘physical’ does not
just mean ‘corporeal.’ ‘Physical’ comes from the Greek jusiB which means nature,
and physical necessity is generally necessity ﬂowing from the natures of things.9
But then, if it is determined by the natures of minds, even without metaphysical
necessity, that they always choose the apparent best, is that not physically necessary, in a broad sense?
That the actions of substances are predetermined by their natures—that is, by
their primitive forces—is unquestionably a thesis of Leibniz’s philosophy; the preestablished harmony depends on it. There is still the question whether that predetermination allows of an interesting opposition between moral necessity and other
sorts of necessity. We have already seen how moral necessity is supposed to be
opposed to ‘‘blind’’ necessity, and that seems to me relatively unproblematic. The
opposition between moral and metaphysical necessity seems to require Leibniz
to deny that free actions follow logically, by the principle of noncontradiction,
from the natures of substances. That may be more problematic for him; I’ll come
back to that in the third section herein. The question before us at the moment is
whether there is yet another sort of necessity, to be called ‘‘physical’’ necessity, by
which free actions do not follow from the natures of substances.
Michael Murray suggests that ‘‘Leibniz did not think physical or causal necessity compatible with freedom.’’10 I am uneasy about the use of the term ‘causal
necessity’ here. I have not noticed Leibniz using it (though I could of course have
overlooked it), and it is not obvious with what we should identify causal necessity
in a Leibnizian context. More than one candidate is available. Leibniz’s explanation of morally necessary free actions is explicitly in terms of causes—ﬁnal
causes. That explanation is opposed to an explanation in terms of ‘‘efﬁcient causes’’; but what is meant by the latter seems to be quite speciﬁcally and narrowly a
mechanical explanation. Leibniz certainly does not mean to deny, but rather to
afﬁrm, that free actions are caused—or at any rate, done—by agents, substances.
And he holds that they are predetermined by prior states of those substances, as
required by the preestablished harmony. It is not surprising, then, that in an earlier
essay Leibniz spoke of efﬁcient causes in a broader sense, contending that ‘‘even
ﬁnal causes can be referred to efﬁcient causes, that is, when the agent is intelligent,
for then it is moved by thought’’ (Grua 28).
Even in his ﬁfth letter to Clarke, Leibniz describes the operation of moral
necessity in terms that I think most of us would call strongly causal:
It is true that Reasons in the mind of a Wise being, and Motives in any
mind whatsoever, do that which answers to the effect produced by weights in a
balance. The author [Clarke] objects that this notion leads to necessity and fatality.
(LC 5.3)

Moral Necessity

187

It is in the course of distinguishing types of necessity in response to this objection
that Leibniz makes the statement I have quoted already that by moral necessity ‘‘a
wise being chooses the best, and every mind follows the strongest inclination’’ (LC
5.4). This is not an isolated instance; Leibniz liked mechanical analogies for the
will (RB 193; T 22; G 7:304/L 488). Volition is like mechanical causation in that the
effect is determined with certainty, and by prior facts; they are unlike, of course, in
that volition does not have a value-free mechanism. They are unlike further, as
Leibniz claims a bit later in the letter, in that the choosing mind is active in a way
that a balance is not. ‘‘Properly speaking, motives do not act upon the mind, as
weights do upon a balance; but ’tis rather the mind that acts by virtue of the
motives, which are its11 dispositions to act’’ (LC 5.15). But the fact that the action of
the motives is the mind’s own action does not show that the motives determine less
surely than the weights in a balance; on the contrary, it shows that ‘‘if the mind
should prefer a weak inclination to a strong one, it would act against itself, and
otherwise than it is disposed to act’’ (LC 5.15).
If in one passage that we have seen Leibniz opposes ‘‘physical causes’’ to
‘‘moral necessity,’’ elsewhere he brings them into positive connection, and even
subsumes physical necessity under moral necessity. At the outset of the Theodicy
he tells us that ‘‘physical necessity is founded on moral necessity, that is on the
choice of the wise, worthy of his wisdom; and that the one as well as the other must
be distinguished from geometrical necessity’’ (T pd2). The reason for this dependence is that the laws of nature, seen here as the source of physical necessity,
depend on God’s free choice,12 which is produced by moral necessity but not by
metaphysical necessity, which is here called ‘‘geometrical.’’ And undoubtedly
God’s choice of the best is the single most important and most foundational case of
ﬁnal causation in the Leibnizian scheme of things.
Leibniz’s system also offers us, however, another and less theological reason
for thinking that ﬁnal causation and moral necessity are fundamental to all natural
causation. As I have noted earlier, the Leibnizian simple substances, the monads,
act by appetition, by a sort of ﬁnal causality, and by moral necessity or an analogue
thereof. But it is the simple substances, and they alone, that are the ultimately real
agents in the Leibnizian universe. The bodies, the ‘‘realm of efﬁcient causes,’’ are
only ‘‘well-founded phenomena.’’ Their motions, governed by mechanical laws of
efﬁcient causation, exist only as harmonious appearances to monads. The ultimately real events that ‘‘found’’ such reality as the motions possess are changes in
monads and are governed by moral or quasi-moral laws of ﬁnal causation. It is only
the processes of ﬁnal causation that are metaphysically fundamental and that
determine what motions shall appear to occur in accordance with the laws of
mechanical or efﬁcient causation. That the processes of ﬁnal causation dictate an
appearance of motion in accordance with mechanical laws is due, I take it, to the
great beauty and value of mechanical order.
From these considerations I believe we must conclude that the Leibnizian
system does not include a metaphysically fundamental type of causal necessity that
can be opposed to moral necessity. Still it is true that Leibnizian moral necessity
operates in a very different way from what most philosophers today would think of

188 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

as causal necessity. It operates by ﬁnal causes, and excludes determination by any
value-free mechanism.
Other questions can be raised about the relation of moral necessity to laws
of nature. I believe the Leibnizian system will allow us to ascribe to free decisions
at least the following independence from laws of nature: no free action can be
predicted, precisely and with certainty, from law-like generalizations and other
facts, by any calculation that can be performed by ﬁnite minds (see DM 7 and 17;
C 21–22/MP 102). Of course, that same sort of independence can be ascribed to
some motions of bodies. In particular, and most obviously on Leibnizian assumptions, it can be ascribed to those motions that are the corporeal, phenomenal
counterpart of free decisions. These factors seem to me to distinguish Leibnizian
moral necessity less fundamentally than the value-laden teleological character of
its operation.

Moral and Metaphysical Necessity
I want now to take a closer look at the relation between moral necessity and
metaphysical necessity. As we have seen, Leibniz says that free decisions are morally
but not metaphysically necessary. I have argued (Adams 1994: chap. 1) that Leibniz
has two main accounts of how any truths can be metaphysically contingent, given
certain constraints operative in his system that might be thought to force him to
regard all truths as necessary. I believe that Leibniz’s conception of moral necessity
presupposes both of these accounts, and thus is not an alternative to them, but at
most a supplement to them—though we may consider interpreting it in a way that
puts it in tension with some of his views about the basis of metaphysical necessity.
In one of Leibniz’s theories of metaphysical contingency, facts are allowed to
be contingent if they have alternatives that are possible in their own nature,
completely free of internal contradiction or incoherence, whether or not a being
possessing the perfect nature that God possesses could coherently choose to actualize them. It is this theory of contingency that appears to be invoked in Leibniz’s
explication of moral necessity in his ﬁfth letter to Clarke, when he says that choice
of the good is not absolutely necessary.
For when God (for instance) chooses the best, what he does not choose, and is
inferior in perfection, is nevertheless possible. . . . For God chooses among possibles, that is, among several alternatives, none of which implies a contradiction.
(LC 5.8)

In this account of free choice, the centerpiece of the argument that ‘‘good, either
true or apparent . . . inclines without necessitating’’ (LC 5.8) is an appeal to the
internal coherence of alternatives for choice, rather than a claim about the nature
of the chooser.
Here I shall set this line of argument aside, however, in order to focus on
Leibniz’s other main theory of contingency, the one that starts with his thesis that
in every true afﬁrmative proposition the concept of the predicate is contained in
some way in that of the subject, and proceeds to distinguish necessary truths, as

Moral Necessity

189

those that can therefore be reduced to identities in a ﬁnite series of steps of analysis,
from contingent truths, whose analysis will yield no such result though it be
continued to inﬁnity. We should not expect Leibniz to exempt facts of free choice
from his conceptual containment thesis about truth, since he regularly says that
it applies to contingent as well as necessary truths (see Adams 1994: 42–43). We
should ask rather how predicates of free choice are included in the complete
concepts of choosers, and whether there is a manner of such containment that
is consonant with moral necessity.
It may be helpful in this inquiry to consider ﬁrst the question how existence is
contained in the concepts of those creatures that actually exist. The answers Leibniz
proposes to this question13 do not treat existence as a fundamental or primitive
constituent of the deﬁnitive concepts of ﬁnite things. The only being that exists by
its own nature alone is God. The existence of other things that actually exist does
not follow from their own concepts alone but only in conjunction with considerations about God. The existence of an actually existing creature, we may say, is
contained in its individual concept, not directly and immediately, even in an inﬁnite analysis, but only in the sense that the concept contains reasons that are
sufﬁcient (together with facts about God) to determine and explain the existence
of the creature. And the most signiﬁcant fact about these reasons, from the point of
view of a theory of moral necessity, is that Leibniz clearly assumes that the reasons
for existence to be found in the concepts of creatures will turn on the value of
the creatures or, more precisely, on the comparative values of the possible worlds
of which they are parts. They are reasons for the existence of the creatures because
they are reasons for God to choose those creatures. And God’s choice is guided, with
moral necessity, by the values of the alternative possible worlds; God chooses
the best.
In this pivotal example we see a way in which the conceptual containment
thesis and the concept of moral necessity seem to mesh very well. The conceptual
containment thesis admits more than one pattern of determination and explanation
of predicates by the concept of the subject. One such pattern, as we have just seen,
involves the same sort of value-laden teleological structure that is involved in moral
necessitation. If the existence of a ﬁnite substance can follow from its concept in this
way, so, surely, can the choices a substance makes follow from a concept that has
among its constituents, in the ﬁrst instance, not the choices themselves, but valueladen reasons from which the choices follow by moral necessity.
And this necessity, we may add, will not be a metaphysical necessity because
no ﬁnite analysis would sufﬁce to derive the choices from the reasons that
are primitive constituents of the concept. With this fusion of moral necessity and
the inﬁnite analysis conception of metaphysical contingency, a Leibnizian theory
of moral necessity could reach its conclusion. And so perhaps it should; but I’d like
to play a bit with the thought of another step in this direction, a further mitigation
of Leibniz’s determinism, though I doubt that it can work for him.
The further step would be a strengthening of the claim that when an agent
chooses freely, there would be no formal or logical incoherence in the agent’s
choosing otherwise. If Leibniz relies only on the inﬁnite analysis theory to shield
free choice from metaphysical necessity, then the claim just mentioned means

190 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

only that there would be no ﬁnitely provable incoherence in the agent’s doing
otherwise. One might want more than that, for there may also be broadly formal
incoherence that is not ﬁnitely provable.
Suppose, for the sake of argument, that Goldbach’s conjecture is true but not
provable. Every even number is the sum of two primes, but there is no proof of that
mathematical fact. Then the hypothesis of a number that is even but not the sum
of two primes is arithmetically incoherent in a way, though it is not provably
incoherent. There are clearly points in Leibniz’s philosophy at which he demands a
broadly formal coherence that is more than freedom from provable incoherence.
Possible worlds, for example, must have the more extensive, broadly formal, but
not merely proof-theoretical coherence. If there is, for example, no possible world
that is as good as the actual world without the horrors of the Thirty Years’ War, that
is surely not because there is a ﬁnitely provable dependence of great goods on
those evils.
Let us ask, then, whether a free agent’s choosing otherwise must be free, not
only from ﬁnitely provable incoherence, but from any sort of broadly formal incoherence. It seems that an afﬁrmative answer to this question would yield a less
deterministic version of Leibniz’s philosophy. For if the agent’s choosing otherwise
would be formally incoherent, though not provably so, that would seem intuitively
to be a metaphysically strong sort of necessitation, even if Leibniz chooses not to
classify it as ‘‘metaphysical necessity.’’ But if choosing otherwise would be formally
coherent in every way, then any ‘‘moral necessity’’ that lies behind the choice
would seem to have much less metaphysical bite.
But in that case, how can the particular choice that is made be determined
and perfectly certain in advance? Thoroughgoing indeterminists would be happy
to say that it is not determined with certainty in advance, but Leibniz is certainly
not indeterminist enough to accept that conclusion. Can he appeal at this point to
the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason? It is determined and certain in advance that the
agent will choose the apparent best, because the apparent bestness of the choice is
a sufﬁcient reason for it, and there is no sufﬁcient reason for any alternative choice.
On this view the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason would indeed be ‘‘the principle of contingent truths.’’ It would have to be strongly independent of the Principle of Noncontradiction; otherwise there would be at least a broadly formal
incoherence, after all, in something happening without a sufﬁcient reason. Indeed
it seems that in order to play this role, the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason itself
would have to be metaphysically contingent in the strong sense that its falsity
would not involve even a broadly formal incoherence.
But then how could the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason be strong enough to
ground the determination of our choices, with certainty, in advance? There is in
some sense supposed to be no real chance in the Leibnizian universe that any
rational agent will choose other than the apparent best. What could be the status of
a principle that keeps that from being a real chance? It must be synthetic, on this
hypothesis, in the sense that, as I have said, its falsity would not involve even a
broadly formal incoherence. And of course, nothing that is not analytic—indeed,
ﬁnitely analytic—will count as ‘‘metaphysically necessary’’ for Leibniz. Some philosophers, however, have thought there are synthetic necessary truths—necessary,

Moral Necessity

191

obviously, not in Leibniz’s sense, but in some other way that seems metaphysical
enough and is often called ‘‘metaphysical.’’ Could the Principle of Sufﬁcient
Reason have for Leibniz something like the status that other philosophers have
conceived as synthetic necessary truth? Leibniz will not call that status ‘‘metaphysical necessity,’’ but is that more than a verbal point?
This suggestion faces objections on two fronts. On the one hand, we may
doubt that it does much to mitigate Leibniz’s determinism. If an agent’s doing
otherwise would violate a principle that is something like a synthetic necessary
truth, a principle that God knows will never be violated, does that leave us able to
say that the agent ‘‘could have done otherwise’’ in a sense much stronger than that
in which we could say it if doing otherwise would violate a principle that is broadly
analytic though not ﬁnitely provable? That is a difﬁcult question.
The opposite objection regards only the interpretation of Leibniz. It is not easy
to determine what Leibniz believed about the necessity or contingency of the
Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason, and its relation to the Principle of Noncontradiction.14 It is clear, however, that in some of his logical writings he committed
himself to the view that all truths are at least broadly analytic—that all facts are
determined, at bottom, by purely formal considerations. This is, I think, an implausible view—so implausible that Leibniz, like virtually every other philosopher,
says a number of things not easily reconcilable with it; and many of his ideas,
fortunately, are detachable from it. Nonetheless, it appears to be a view that he
held and thought important; it seems to be presupposed in his inﬁnite analysis
theory of contingency. And it obviously implies that the Principle of Sufﬁcient
Reason, and all facts about free choice, are broadly analytic, and their negations
incoherent, even if not provably so.
Similar things can be said about the other line along which Leibniz might try
to explain the infallible predetermination of free choices without appeal to even
broadly analytic truth—namely, in terms of the nature of the choosing agent. In an
early essay he wrote that ‘‘even moral causes are natural, for they are taken from the
nature of the mind’’ (Grua 28).15 Early and late he writes that ‘‘God wills the best
by his own nature’’ and that ‘‘it follows from the nature of God that he prefers the
most perfect.’’16 And I have already argued that if values determine choices, in a
Leibnizian context, the nature of the chooser must participate in the determination. Certainly Leibniz thought that particular free choices do not follow from a
mind’s nature by a ﬁnite formal demonstration, and are thus not metaphysically
necessitated in his strict (and arguably artiﬁcial) sense. May he also have supposed
that the connection between the mind’s nature and its choices is not even broadly
analytic?—that the hypothesis of a mind with the same nature choosing otherwise
would not be attended with even the sort of incoherence that may be thought to
attend a mathematical hypothesis that is false but not provably false? And may he at
the same time have supposed that the connection between the mind’s nature and
its free choices is nonetheless strong enough for the nature to determine the
choices with certainty in advance?
This thought faces a pair of objections similar to those that attended the alternative account in terms of the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason. On the one hand,
if the nature of a mind infallibly determines its choices, that seems to imply a strong

192 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

determinism, hardly weaker than what is normally thought of as causal determinism or causal necessitation of the choices (though not, of course, determination by a value-free mechanism). We may wonder how much this mitigates
Leibniz’s determinism. It is not clear to me whether it would be more mitigating
than determination by a Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason that would have something
like the status of a synthetic necessary truth.
The opposite objection attacks the claimed nonanalyticity of the connection
between the mind and its choices. Even outside the Leibnizian context, when it is
said that some fact follows from the nature of a thing, it is often assumed that the
connection is at least broadly analytic—perhaps because of the relation between
the concepts of nature and deﬁnition in the philosophical tradition. For Leibniz,
of course, to the extent that he is committed to a theory that grounds all truth on
formal syntactical relationships, the following of particular choices from the natures of the agents must be at least broadly analytic, as all truths must be. And his
statement, which I have quoted, from his ﬁfth letter to Clarke, that ‘‘if the mind
should prefer a weak inclination to a strong one, it would act against itself, and
otherwise than it is disposed to act’’ (LC 5.15), seems to suggest pretty speciﬁcally
that there would be something incoherent in a mind’s acting otherwise than according to its strongest preexisting inclination.
I conclude that while things Leibniz says about moral necessity ﬁt into very
interesting views about how free choices are determined and explained, they are
unlikely to lead us to a much softer reading of his determinism.

Notes
This essay was presented to the Paciﬁc Division of the American Philosophical Association in April
2000, and to the philosophy department of Purdue University in September 2000; I ﬁrst developed some
of the main ideas in a seminar on Leibniz at Yale University. I am indebted to many for helpful
discussion—in particular to Jan Cover, Martin Curd, Patricia Curd, Sukjae Lee, and especially to
Michael Murray, who presented extensive written comments on the paper at the APA.
1. Most explicitly in T a3; apparently also in T 282. Both passages are explicitly targets of Des
Bosses’s objection (G 2:421).
2. G 2:418–420; see also G 2:421–424. The concession is noted in Grua 1953: 237.
3. Murray 1995: 106–107; see Murray 1996: 37–43.
4. In Leibniz’s conception of ﬁnal causation, unlike Aristotle’s, the valued end must be an object
of perception and appetition to the subject or agent. Arguably, also, the good of the whole universe, as
distinct from that of the agent, plays a larger role in Leibnizian than in Aristotelian ﬁnal causation. I am
indebted to discussion with Patricia Curd on these points.
5. See G 7:451/L 472, from 1696.
6. I am indebted to Jan Cover for pressing me on the issue addressed in this paragraph.
7. In Leibniz’s system this may apply most cleanly to God’s choosing; I am abstracting here from
the role that God’s ‘‘concurrence’’ may play in explaining the choices of ﬁnite substances.
8. Such capacities could of course ﬁgure in indeterministic as well as deterministic theories of
ﬁnal causation.
9. When Granado, for instance, says that when ‘‘God wills the best, even if it is not necessary
physically, but rather absolutely free . . . still it is morally necessary’’ (quoted in Knebel 1991a: 5, n. 11), he
is presumably not making the irrelevant (because platitudinous) exclusion of corporeal necessity from
God, but rather allowing that God’s choice of the best does not follow necessarily from the divine
nature.

Moral Necessity

193

10. Murray 1995: 97; see Murray 1995: 95, and Murray 1996: 49.
11. Here I follow Clarke’s translation, as reprinted by Alexander, and G 7:392, which reads ses,
as the sense of the passage seems to demand. The critical edition, Robinet 1957, has des. The reading
I have chosen implies nothing that is not clearly implied in the passage as a whole.
12. See RB 178–179.
13. See the texts cited in Adams 1994: 43 (including n. 65 on that page).
14. See Parkinson 1965: 62–69.
15. Dated 1683–86 by watermark, according to A.6.4:2323.
16. Grua 289 (probably from the early 1680s) and 393 (from 1698).

10

Spontaneity and Freedom
in Leibniz
M I C H A E L J. M U R R A Y

n the history of metaphysics philosophers have disagreed, sometimes with vigor,

I over whether or not an agent can be free and responsible in choosing, while also

being determined to so choose. In contemporary metaphysics those who think an
agent can be free and responsible while so determined we call ‘‘compatibilists’’ and
those who do not we call ‘‘libertarians.’’
Historically, those who are committed to libertarianism are usually so committed for at least one of two reasons. First, some are convinced that the very idea
of an agent acting freely and responsibly is incoherent when sufﬁcient conditions
for the choice obtain, whether internal or external to the agent. If, it is claimed, the
choice of the agent can be traced back to states of affairs that are sufﬁcient for the
choice, the choice is simply a consequence of those conditions, and thus not an act
of the agent himself. As a result, such choices are neither free nor something for
which the agent is morally responsible.
Others, however, are committed to libertarianism for theological reasons. The
intuition here is that if the agent is determined to do what she does by external
forces, then the agent is not ultimately responsible for her actions and, what is
worse, God is. As a result, libertarians of this sort aim to preserve the notion of free
and responsible action in the world as a way of preventing culpability from working
its way back to God. Libertarian freedom provides the needed buffer.
Likewise, those who are committed to compatibilism are so committed for one
of two reasons. First, some are convinced that the very idea of an agent acting freely
and responsibly is incoherent unless the agent is the ultimate source of the action.
However, the compatibilist thinks that ultimacy requires (merely?) that cognitive
and/or conative states internal to the agent be the proximate cause of the act.
Further, the compatibilist thinks that this is a sufﬁcient condition for an act being
free. As a result the compatibilist might agree, and ﬁnd it uninteresting, that the
internal states that are the proximate cause of the act are themselves, in turn, caused
by other states, perhaps even other states external to the agent.
194

Spontaneity and Freedom 195

Other compatibilists, more rare among metaphysicians these days, are motivated by theological considerations. The Reformed theological tradition is noted, or perhaps notorious, for endorsing compatibilism on such grounds. This
tradition regards God’s unfettered exercise of providence over nature to be a
centerpiece of proper theology. Thus, Reformed theologians typically defend the
claim that all events in the created order happen as a result of unconditional
divine decrees. In order for God to exercise robust control over creation, all
events in the created order must ﬁnd their ultimate cause in God. Thus Francis
Turretin, a typical seventeenth-century Reformed theologian, afﬁrms that the
divine decrees must be held to necessitate each event, offering ﬁve arguments for
the claim:
(1) All things were decreed of God by an eternal and unchangeable counsel; hence
they cannot but take place in the appointed time. Otherwise the counsel of God
would be changed, which the Scriptures declare to be impossible. . . . (2) Scripture
predicts such necessity . . . ‘‘The Son of Man goeth, as it was determined’’ (Luke
22:22). . . . (3) The most fortuitous and casual things are said to happen necessarily. . . . (4) As all things are foreseen by an infallible foreknowledge, so they
must necessarily happen infallibly. (5) They are certainly predicted as future so
that the word of God cannot fail, nor can the Scripture be broken. Therefore, they
must happen necessarily. (Turretin 1992: vol. 1, 320)

Still, in spite of the afﬁrmation of the necessitation of all events by unconditional
divine decree, Reformed thinkers still believed there to be room for creaturely
freedom. Thus, Turretin continues:
Although in relation to the ﬁrst cause, all things are said to be necessary, yet taken
according to themselves, certain things can be free, contingent, and fortuitous,
because each thing is and may be judged according to proximate and particular
causes. . . . Hence we might rightly say, ‘‘Adam sinned freely and necessarily’’: the
latter with respect to the decree and the futurition of the thing; the former with
respect to his will and as to the mode. For no matter what the necessity of the
decree, still Adam sinned voluntarily and consequently most freely. (Turretin 1992:
vol. 1, 321)

Yet while these libertarians and compatibilists come down on opposite sides
of the question of whether or not freedom and determination are compatible, they
all agree that free and responsible acting requires that the agent be the locus of
explanation in some central sense. And thus each camp is, in its own way, committed to the claim that when it comes to free action, the explanation for the act
properly terminates in the agent in some important sense. This internal, selfinitiating character of free acts is what both compatibilists and libertarians mean
when they talk of ‘‘spontaneity.’’
Careful attention to the way in which ﬁgures in the history of metaphysics use
the word ‘spontaneous’ (and its antonyms, such as ‘violent’ and ‘coerced’) is useful
in getting to the heart of their respective positions on freedom, because it allows
one to discern just what kinds of determination each ﬁgure takes to be consistent or
inconsistent with freedom. For each different sort of determination that presents a

196 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

threat to freedom, there is a corresponding variety of ‘‘spontaneity.’’ But what sorts
of determinism were seen to be threatening to freedom in the seventeenth century, and what sorts of spontaneity were touted as necessary conditions for free
action?
In his Institutio, the Reformed theologian Turretin provides a list of six sorts of
determination or necessity that were regarded by various ﬁgures as inconsistent with
spontaneity, and thus with freedom. They are as follows:
First, the necessity of coercion arising from an external agent (he who is compelled,
contributing nothing). Second, physical and brute necessity occurring in inanimates and brutes who act from blind impulse of nature or a brute instinct and
innate appetite, without, however, any light of reason . . . and without any choice.
The third necessity is the necessity of the creature’s dependence on God . . . (to wit,
the government of providence: [1] in the antecedent decree; [2] in the subsequent
execution). This necessity is called hypothetical both of infallibility (with respect to
prescience) and of immutability (with respect to the decree and actual concourse).
Fourth, rational necessity of determination to one thing by a judgment of the
practical intellect (which the will cannot resist). Fifth, moral necessity or slavery
arising from good or bad habits and the presentation of objects to their faculties. . . .
Hence it will happen that the will (free in itself) is so determined either to good or
to evil that it cannot but act either well or badly. . . . Sixth, the necessity of the
existence of the thing or of the event, in virtue of which, when a thing is, it cannot
but be. (Turretin 1992: vol. 1, 661–662)

Advocates of the most extreme forms of libertarianism in the period would require
that free actions are not determined in any of the ﬁrst ﬁve respects. Leibniz, no
friend of libertarianism, does not want to go so far. But Leibniz sees more of these
sources of determination as threats to freedom than are traditionally acknowledged. In this essay I will argue that Leibniz takes freedom-preserving spontaneity
to be inconsistent with the ﬁrst three types of necessity described here. In addition,
I will argue that Leibniz has similar difﬁculties with necessity of the fourth
and ﬁfth sorts when the necessity is understood to be metaphysical or physical
necessity.
To that end, I begin, in the second section, with an examination of a variety
of spontaneity often endorsed by Leibniz, which clearly will not serve his deeper
metaphysical aims. This sort of freedom is the sort Leibniz attributes to substances
in virtue of his basic metaphysical commitments, which include the claim that
substances contain within themselves the complete ratio for all of their properties.
In the third section I then go on to show that Leibniz rejects the ﬁrst two sorts of
necessitation, physical necessity and coercion. In the fourth section, I show that
Leibniz is willing to accept the claim that the will is necessitated by practical
deliberation and/or moral habits, as long as the sense of necessity is carefully
qualiﬁed. Finally, in the ﬁfth section I argue that Leibniz rejects the third sort of
necessity, that is, divine necessitation, by arguing that such necessitation, if present,
would both undermine creaturely freedom and render God culpable for creaturely
sin. From this I will conclude that Leibniz has many more anticompatibilist
sympathies than is commonly recognized.

Spontaneity and Freedom

197

Freedom and Spontaneity-for-Free
Throughout his philosophical career Leibniz afﬁrms and reafﬁrms his commitment to the claim that spontaneity is a necessary condition for freedom. The oftcited deﬁnition of freedom from the Theodicy is typical:
I have shown that freedom, according to the deﬁnition required in the schools of
theology, consists in intelligence, which involves a clear knowledge of the object
of deliberation, in spontaneity, whereby we determine ourselves, and in contingency, that is, in the exclusion of logical or metaphysical necessity. Intelligence is,
as it were, the soul of freedom, and the rest is as its body and foundation. The free
substance is self-determining and that according to the motive of good perceived
by the understanding, which inclines it without necessitating it: and all the conditions of freedom are comprised in these few words. (T 288/H 303)

And shortly thereafter he afﬁrms the standard doctrine of spontaneity as follows:
The spontaneity of our actions can therefore no longer be questioned; and Aristotle has deﬁned it well, saying that an action is spontaneous when its source is in
him who acts. . . . Thus it is that our actions and our wills depend entirely upon us.
(T 301/H 309–10)

Clearly, Leibniz thinks there is something about his account which guarantees that
we act with spontaneity. What is it? The answer can be discerned from a variety of
texts, of which the following are typical:
[T]rue spontaneity is common to us and all simple substances, and . . . in the
intelligent or free substance this becomes a mastery over its actions. That cannot
be better explained than by the System of Pre-established Harmony, which I indeed propounded some years ago. There I pointed out that by nature every simple
substance has perception, and that its individuality consists in the perpetual law
which brings about the sequence of perceptions that are assigned to it, springing
naturally from one another. . . . Whence it follows that the soul has in itself a
perfect spontaneity, so that it depends only upon God and itself in its action.
(T 291/H 304)1

In short, Leibniz thinks that his doctrine of preestablished harmony secures the
spontaneity of substances ‘‘for free.’’ Seen in a certain way, Leibniz’s defense of
spontaneity is not surprising. After all, the preestablished harmony doctrine does
entail that the complete explanation for any state of a substance is contained in the
prior state of that substance. And thus, Leibnizian substances seem to have all the
spontaneity it is possible to have. Given the preestablished harmony, spontaneity
seems to be secured for free.
On the other hand, securing spontaneity-for-free, as Leibniz so often does
when writing on freedom, seems in many respects to undercut his own view. The
reason for this is that it simply does not serve to nail down the distinction between
free and unfree action that spontaneity was supposed to secure. Rather, spontaneity is invoked, by all parties, as a way of excluding from the domain of free

198 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

action both (i) those acts that are directly caused by external agents, and (ii)
coerced acts. On the former we ﬁnd Bishop Bramhall, as one representative
example, claiming:
For the clearer understanding of these things, and to know what spontaneity is,
let us consult awhile with the Schools about the distinct order of voluntary or
involuntary actions. Some acts proceed wholly from an extrinsical cause; as the
throwing of a stone upwards, a rape, or the drawing of a Christian by plain force
to the idol’s temple; these are called violent acts. Secondly, some proceed from
an intrinsical cause, but without any manner of knowledge of the end, as the
falling of a stone downwards; these are called natural acts. . . . So then the formal
reason of liberty is election. The necessary requisite to election is deliberation.
Deliberation implyeth the actual use of reason. But deliberation and election
cannot possibly subsist with an extrinsical predetermination to one. How should
a man deliberate or choose which way to go, who knows that all ways are shut
against him and made impossible to him, but only one? This is the genuine
sense of these words voluntary and spontaneous in this question. (Hobbes 1839:
vol. 5, 83–84)

And later, with respect to coercion, Bramhall continues:
All this proceeds from the sensitive passion of fear, which is a perturbation arising
from the expectation of some imminent evil. . . . Fear is commonly of one, deliberation of more than one; fear is of those things which are not in our power,
deliberation of those things which are in our power; fear ariseth many times out of
natural antipathies, but in these disconveniences of nature deliberation hath no
place at all. In a word, fear is an enemy to deliberation, and betrayeth the succours
of the soul. If the horse did deliberate, he should consult with reason, whether it
were more expedient for him to go that way or not; he would represent to himself
all the dangers both of going and staying, and compare the one with the other, and
elect that which is less evil; he should consider whether it were not better to
endure a little hazard, than ungratefully and dishonestly to fail in his duty towards
his master, who did breed him and doth feed him. This the horse doth not; neither
is it possible for him to do it. (Hobbes 1839: vol. 5, 86–87)

If we are to take Leibniz at his word in the Theodicy and numerous other texts
where he endorses the spontaneity-for-free doctrine, we will have to conclude that
Leibniz holds that the Christian being dragged into the idol temple, and the
person who is coerced by fear, are acting spontaneously.
This would be a very high price to pay, and one surely Leibniz did not want to
pay. In the context of discussing freedom, at any rate, Leibniz was going to have to
deliver some way of making the distinction that does not simply fall out of the
preestablished harmony. Thus, readers of Leibniz must dispense with the sort of
conﬁdent bluster one gets when he says, for example, that:
There is no coercion in voluntary action, because, even though numerous representations of external things might exist in our minds, our voluntary actions
are always spontaneous, because such acts have their causes within the agent.
The theory of the harmony between body and mind pre-established by God
from the beginning explains this more clearly than has been possible until now.
(G 6:455)

Spontaneity and Freedom

199

Freedom from External Causes
Although Leibniz frequently insists that spontaneity-for-free gives him the spontaneity requisite for genuine freedom, we have seen that he cannot consistently
maintain such a view. And in fact, in numerous other texts he backs down from
this bold claim, and offers an account of spontaneity and external determination
that moves him closer to a traditional notion of spontaneity.
Leibniz thinks that there are two types of external quasi-causes that must be
absent for spontaneous action to occur. First, and most obviously, it must be the
case that the action of the agent is not physically quasi-caused. In the Theodicy
Leibniz remarks:
When we act freely we are not being forced, as would happen if we were pushed
on to a precipice and thrown from top to bottom; and we are not prevented from
having a free mind when we deliberate, as would happen if we were given a potion
to deprive us of discernment. (T 34/H 143)

Second, Leibniz holds, in keeping with tradition, that free acts must be free of
coercion. In the following, he describes two sorts of ‘‘constraint’’ that are incompatible with freedom, the second of which is coercion:
As for ‘constraint,’ it is useful to distinguish two sorts: physical, as when a man is
imprisoned against his will or thrown off a precipice; and moral, as for example the
fear of a greater evil. (NE 2.21.13/RB 179)

In both of these cases, the acts are not spontaneous because they can be attributed
to an external source or quasi-cause.
Since Leibniz is committed to the claim that each state of a substance can be
fully explained in terms of its own law of the series alone, he is going to have to
provide some account to distinguish those states of the substance that are genuinely
spontaneous from those that are rightly ascribed to external quasi-causes. In various
texts Leibniz appears to provide three related but distinct accounts of how such
discriminations might be made. According to the ﬁrst account, spontaneous states
consist of clear perceptions in the monad, while confused perceptions are not
spontaneous. In a published response to Bayle, Leibniz employs this distinction:
Everyone who accepts immaterial indivisible substances attributes to them a simultaneous multitude of perceptions, and a spontaneity in their reasonings and
their voluntary acts. I am therefore only extending that spontaneity to their confused and involuntary thoughts, and showing that their nature is to contain everything that is external. . . . In another sense, however, it is reasonable to call
those things which consist in confused thoughts, through which there is involuntariness and incomprehension, perturbations (as the Ancients did) or passions.
And this is what in ordinary speech we not unreasonably attribute to the conﬂict of
the body with the mind, since our confused thoughts represent the body or the
ﬂesh, and constitute our imperfection. (G 4:564–565/WF 118)2

Here Leibniz simply identiﬁes the spontaneous states of a substance with its clear
perceptions.

200 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

In other texts, Leibniz offers a second account. On this second account,
spontaneous states are those that result when an agent moves from having less clear
to more clear perceptions, and thus from lesser to greater overall perfection:
As I have already said, anything which occurs in what is strictly a substance must
be a case of ‘action’ in the metaphysically rigorous sense of something which
occurs in the substance spontaneously, arising out of its own depths; for no created
substance can have an inﬂuence upon any other, so that everything comes to a
substance from itself (though ultimately from God). But if we take ‘action’ to be
an endeavour towards perfection, and ‘passion’ to be the opposite, then genuine
substances are active only when their perceptions (for I grant perceptions to all of
them) are becoming better developed and more distinct, just as they are passive
only when their perceptions are becoming more confused. . . . From that point of
view a body can be said to ‘act’ when there is spontaneity in its change, and to
‘undergo passively’ when it is pushed or blocked by another body; just as with the
true action or passion of a true substance, we can take to be its ‘action,’ and attribute
to the substance itself, any change through which it comes closer to its own perfection; and can take to be its ‘passion,’ and attribute to an outside cause . . . any
change in which the reverse happens. (NE 2.21.72/RB 210–211)3

Here, whether or not a state is spontaneous depends on facts about the immediately preceding state of the substance. If the transition from state to state is one in
which the substance moves from lesser to greater perfection, then the succeeding
state is spontaneous, and if not, it is externally quasi-caused.
There is what appears to be a still further account in other texts. On this account,
spontaneity depends on the explanatory relationship between states of distinct substances. Speciﬁcally, if state S1 of substance B1 is a clear perception, and S1 provides
us with an explanation for the existence or coming to be of a state S2 of some distinct
substance B2, then B1 is active with respect to S1 and B2 is passive with respect to S2.
[W]hat is active in certain respects is passive from another point of view; active in
so far as what we distinctly know in it serves to explain what takes place in another,
and passive in so far as the explanation of what takes place in it is to be found in
that which is distinctly known in another. (Mon 52/AG 219–220)

In virtue of what, one might wonder, could the state of one substance serve to
ground the explanations of the state of another? The answer, found earlier in the
text, is that in harmonizing substances, God brings it about that B2 exhibits S2 in
order to make its coexistence with B1 harmonious.
My interest here is not in arguing for the ultimate consistency of these accounts or for their relative merits taken severally. What is important is that we see
that Leibniz was not content to rest with spontaneity-for-free. Such spontaneity
could not distinguish free acts from physically determined or coerced acts—
something Leibniz saw a need to do, and for good reason.

Freedom from Psychological Determinism
Earlier we saw that some ﬁgures in the seventeenth century were keen to preserve
another sort of spontaneity in freedom. This is the sort of spontaneity that preserves

Spontaneity and Freedom 201

causal independence of volitions from the deliverances of the practical intellect. In
other words, this variety of spontaneity aimed to exclude psychological determinism or, more speciﬁcally, volitions that are causally necessitated by psychological
antecedents. Two questions arise concerning this sort of spontaneity. First, why did
various thinkers want to endorse spontaneity of this sort? Or, more speciﬁcally,
what sort of problem was psychological determinism of volition via practical intellect seen to present? Second, what reasons are there to think that Leibniz wanted
to endorse spontaneity of this sort?
This second question is especially signiﬁcant since one might think there is
good reason to suppose that psychological determinism would not trouble Leibniz
at all. There are at least two reasons for this. First, he seems to accept intersubstantial quasi-causal determinism at the phenomenal level of description. Second, he also seems to accept intrasubstantial causal determinism between adjoining
temporal states of a substance at the ground ﬂoor metaphysical level.4
Thus, if Leibniz wanted to reject psychological determinism as I claim, one
wants to know what could motivate such a rejection. Surely, Leibniz was not motivated by the libertarian intuitions outlined earlier, according to which freedom
is incompatible with sufﬁcient conditions. Nonetheless, there are passages where
Leibniz indicates that efﬁcient causal sufﬁcient conditions are not compatible with
choice. Here are two:
Mr. Hobbes refuses to listen to anything about a moral necessity either, on the
ground that everything really happens through physical causes. But there is
nonetheless reason to draw an important distinction between the necessity which
constrains the wise to do good, and which is called moral, even existing in relation
to God, and that blind necessity. . . . (T h3/G 6:390)5
All the natural forces of bodies are subject to mechanical laws, and all the
natural forces of mind are subject to moral laws. The former follow the order of
efﬁcient causes, and the latter follow the order of ﬁnal causes. The former operate
without liberty, like a watch, the latter are exercised with liberty. (LC 5.124/G
7:419; emphasis added)

What distinction did Leibniz mean to make in those passages where he endorses ‘‘moral necessity’’ and ‘‘moral laws’’ in choice but not ‘‘physical necessity’’ or
‘‘mechanical laws’’?
Elsewhere I have argued that Leibniz’s use of the phrase ‘moral necessity’ in
the context of the psychology of choice was meant to signify an alliance with one
well-established tradition in faculty psychology (Murray 1996). This connection is
important, in part because one of the distinctive features of this tradition is that it
endorses sufﬁcient reasons for choice while denying that psychological antecedents
physically necessitate choices. Why think Leibniz appropriated this tradition? I turn
to that question presently.
Those in the faculty psychology tradition agreed that free action was to be
explained ultimately in terms of the activity of intellect and will. Without going
into details, those in this tradition held that the intellect carries on the task of
deliberating about alternative courses of action and issuing practical judgments,
while the will chooses one course of action judged to be good. But even the most

202 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

compatibilist-friendly participants in this tradition would ﬁrmly reject the claim
that practical judgments could physically necessitate the will (with one exception:
the case in which the course of action under consideration is loving God ‘‘understood in his essence’’). Courses of action judged to be good, they argued, could
‘‘incline’’ the will but cannot necessitate it. All of them took this to entail that
consideration of any such course of action failed physically and metaphysically to
necessitate choice.6
There is a dizzying variety of variations on this basic theme. Some—Scotus
and Molina for example—held that even after all the evidence was in from
practical deliberation, the will maintained an utter indifference, remaining free to
choose the object judged best, some lesser object, or no object at all.7 Others found
nothing unsettling about the will infallibly choosing the single course of action
judged best, as long as metaphysical and physical contingency were maintained
(for example, see Bellarmino 1873: vol. 5, 590–591).8 Of course, exactly how the
‘infallibility’ was to be understood was far from clear.
At the end of the sixteenth century there were roughly two classes of views
held by those within the scholastic faculty psychology tradition: intellectualists
and voluntarists.9 Intellectualists were wedded to the metaphysical impossibility of
‘‘self-moved movers.’’ As a result, they held that the will could only form a volition
when it was moved to do so by some, we might say, sufﬁcient reason—in this case,
a practical judgment that such-and-such course of action should be chosen here
and now.
Critics of this view argued that it involved a vicious intellectual determinism
since it appeared to make the will determined by the practical intellect. This, they
argued, would undercut the freedom of the will since the operation of the intellect,
even in practical deliberation, was regarded as determined. Some tried to thwart this
objection by arguing that the will exercises control over the process of practical
deliberation, rendering the activity of the intellect free, albeit in a derivative sense.
However, critics argued that this view falls prey to an equally vicious inﬁnite regress,
since the intellectualists claimed that each act of will in turn required a judgment
of the intellect to move it.
Voluntarists held that the aim of practical deliberation was rather to determine
a slate of acceptable possible courses of action, from which the will was then able to
select one. Critics contended, among other things, that the view was metaphysically
impossible since it required that the will be reduced from potency to act by itself,
making it a ‘‘self-moved mover.’’
The voluntarist view is not strictly relevant here since Leibniz makes it no part
of his own intellectual heritage. On the other hand, the developments within the
intellectualist tradition are critical. Any plausible defense of intellectualism would
have to show how one could avoid determinism on the one hand, and the vicious
inﬁnite regress on the other. How might this be done? One way perhaps is to press
hard on the ‘‘inclination without necessitation’’ claim. One could then argue
that if the intellect judges a certain course of action to be best, such a judgment
might not sufﬁce to physically determine the choice of the will, and yet the will
might ﬁnd all other courses of action correspondingly less attractive, and thus
would never in fact choose these other courses.

Spontaneity and Freedom

203

Is this view coherent? That is, is it open to the intellectualist (i) to afﬁrm that
the will does infallibly follow the last practical judgment but also (ii) to deny that
the last practical judgment causally determines the choice of the will? One notable
school of Spanish Jesuits, the ‘‘moral necessitarians,’’ thought so. The two originators of this third main variant, Diego Ruiz de Montoya and Diego Granado,
argued that this pair of positions could be maintained, and viewed this as an
alternative to voluntarism and the prevailing intellectualist model. They claimed
that while the choice of the will follows infallibly given the last practical judgment,
this relationship fell short of physical necessitation, and they described the modality
governing the relationship between last practical judgment and choice as having
necessitas moralis, moral necessity.10
The moral necessitarian view itself spawned a host of variants in the seventeenth century. A central point of contention among critics and defenders was
whether or not moral necessity was in fact distinguishable from physical necessity.
Moral necessitarians argued that it was, and expended a good deal of effort, especially after 1650, trying to tease out a distinction. Thus we ﬁnd numerous passages like these:
Thus, a subject has a metaphysical necessity to act when . . . if it failed to happen,
two contradictories would be given, which is certainly repugnant. Something is
physically necessary, however, when it could not fail to happen naturally and
without a miracle, even if it could happen miraculously. Thus, ﬁnally, something
is morally necessary when, by way of inclination, that which usually, or always,
or almost always is accustomed to occur, cannot fail to happen, even if it can
fail absolutely or in light of a law of nature. (Izquierdo 1670: vol. 2, tract. 10, disp.
32, q. 3, 454)
In things and in objects there exist many necessities concerning existence or
essence. The ﬁrst is called Moral, and this occurs when a thing occurs always or
almost always in the same manner. But this necessity does not exclude Physical
and Metaphysical contingency: not Physical because the thing is able to happen
otherwise Physically; not Metaphysically because of the fact that if some other
thing would happen, a contradiction does not follow. The second necessity is
Physical, which excludes Moral contingency because out of the nature of the
thing it exists as it does, since it cannot naturally happen otherwise since the thing
does not have the Physical power to the opposite effect; for example, when ﬁre
is applied to a combustible patient and it does not burn, it is a miracle, and thus
it cannot happen otherwise naturally. But this necessity does not exclude Metaphysical contingency because if combustion did not occur a contradiction would
not follow. The third necessity is Metaphysical, which excludes all contingency,
Moral and Physical, because it is impossible that a contradiction ever occur, and
the Physical power for this to occur cannot be given, and this is the highest of all
necessities. (de Peñaﬁel 1663: 522a)

Early advocates of moral necessity were unwilling to regard the will as morally
necessitated in every act of choice. However, as defenders began to see ways of
pressing the view into theological service (explaining foreknowledge, providence,
and election), some began to argue that every volition was morally necessitated.
This view seems to have been the majority view, for example, among Franciscans

204 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

at the Sorbonne during the 1670s, the period when coincidentally Leibniz was in
Paris. The following derives from a deﬁnitive defense of the position from the
Parisian Franciscan Jeronimo de Sousa in 1680:
You ask . . . whether the will, whenever it acts, always acts in a morally necessitated
way. . . . I respond afﬁrmatively, for this necessarily agrees with the will; just as it
is necessary that the will have the good for its motive object when it operates,
for this good both lures and moves, and also predetermines and necessitates it.
(Sousa 1680: 29)11

The afﬁnities between this moral necessitarian view and Leibniz’s own views on
the psychology of freedom are striking. Compare the following text, for example:
From this it can be understood what is that ‘indifference’ which accompanies
freedom. Just as contingency is opposed to metaphysical necessity, so indifference
excludes not only metaphysical but also physical necessity. It is in a way [quodammodo] a matter of physical necessity that God should do everything in the best
possible way. . . . It is also a matter of physical necessity that those conﬁrmed in the
good . . . should act in accordance with virtue. . . . Again, it is a matter of physical
necessity that something heavy tends downwards. . . . But it is not a matter of
physical necessity that men should choose something in this life, however specious
and apparent a good may be; though there is sometimes a very strong presumption
to that effect. It indeed may never be possible for there to be an absolute metaphysical indifference, such that the mind is in exactly the same state with respect
to each contradictory, and that anything should be in a state of equilibrium with,
so to speak, its whole nature. . . . Yet the mind has this much physical indifference,
that it is not even subject to physical necessity, far less metaphysical; that is, no
universal reason or law of nature is assignable from which any creature, no matter
how perfect and well-informed about the state of the mind, can infer with certainty what the mind will choose—at any rate naturally, without the extraordinary
concourse of God. (C 21–22/MP 101–102)12

One might think that Leibniz could not have been a partisan of moral necessity
since he sometimes denies one of the moral necessitarians’ central claims, namely
that the will does or must infallibly follow the last practical judgment of the
intellect. For example, in one place Leibniz remarks, ‘‘we do not always follow the
latest judgment of the practical understanding when we resolve to will’’ (T 51/H
151). Careful examination makes it clear, however, that Leibniz’s motives for denying this maxim are not libertarian. Instead the denial springs from his account of
the role of passions in choice.
According to most variants of the intellectualist tradition, passions affect
choice by inﬂuencing the way in which deliberation itself takes place. We can see
this at work in Aquinas’s account of akrasia. On his view, passions affect choice by
changing the premises that the intellect employs in deducing the last practical
judgment. I know that sweet things are good to taste and I know that high-fat foods
are bad for me. So, as I examine the piece of chocolate cake, my practical intellect
must come to regard it either as a sweet thing (to be enjoyed) or as an unhealthy (to
be avoided). I might well have some understanding of the fact that the thing before
me is both. But when it comes to the termination of practical deliberation, only

Spontaneity and Freedom

205

one of these renderings becomes salient. The role of passions for Aquinas is to
inﬂuence which of the two judgments will become effective (ST 1a2ae, q. 10, a. 3).
Leibniz’s own account of the role of passions has to be somewhat more direct
since, for him, passions are themselves appetitions resulting from unconscious or
confused perceptions or apprehensions. In keeping with the fundamental metaphysical claim that all properties of monads are either perceptions or appetitions,
Leibniz counts passions among the latter. As such, passions compete with the
conatus induced by practical judgment.
Thus, when we see Leibniz holding that the last practical judgment of the
intellect is not always effective in moving the will to choice, it is not because he is
departing from the moral necessitarian tradition in thinking that the will can
choose something judged less good. Instead, Leibniz is merely admitting that, in
addition to the appetites generated by the conscious process of practical deliberation, confused perceptions unconsciously generate competing unconscious appetites. As a result, although choice is not determined by the deliverances of practical
reason, it is determined by the deliverances of perception tout court including
adequate ideas, which ﬁgure into practical deliberation, and confused imperceptible ideas, which give rise to competing passions (G 3:401/AG 194). Thus, the full
text of the passage cited earlier reads as follows:
Besides, we do not always follow the latest judgment of the practical understanding when we resolve to will; but we always follow, in our willing, the result of
all the inclinations that come from the direction both of reasons and passions, and
this often happens without an express judgment of the understanding. (T 51/H 151)

Of course, even when the practical intellect does issue in a ﬁnal judgment, the
inclinations induced by this judgment can still be overridden by desires induced by
inadequate ideas. As a result, only those rational agents who are free from passions
altogether or who have their passions thoroughly harnessed are capable of choosing
in accord with the deliverances of practical reason alone:
I think it is only God’s will that always follows the judgments of the understanding:
all creatures are subject to some passions, or to perceptions at least, that are not
composed entirely of what I call adequate ideas. . . . As for us, in addition to
judgments of the understanding, of which we have an express knowledge, there are
mingled therewith confused perceptions of the senses, and these beget passions
and even imperceptible inclinations, of which we are not always aware. These
movements often thwart the judgment of the practical understanding. (T 310/H
313–314)13

Thus, while Leibniz does not hold that willing is subject simply to the deliverances
of the practical intellect, he does hold that willing is the result of a ‘‘vector sum’’ of
desires for those things that are apprehended as good, whether by way of adequate
or inadequate ideas.
I have argued that Leibniz deploys moral necessity in much the way that
the Jesuit moral necessitarian tradition did. Does this mean that Leibniz, in fact,
appropriated this tradition for himself? It is worth noting that Leibniz explicitly
indicates his agreement with this tradition in the correspondence with Des Bosses.

206 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

It is also notable that some early critics of the Theodicy criticized it because (they
claimed) it appropriated this Jesuit tradition. Furthermore, defenders of Leibniz
replied to these critics by defending this Jesuit tradition.14
Others have expressed doubts about the similarity between Jesuit and Leibnizian moral necessitation. Those who have commented on the matter and its
relevance for the issue at hand have said that Leibniz means to distinguish moral
necessity from:
(1) Only metaphysical necessity (Spinozistic necessity)
(2) ‘‘Blind necessitation’’
(3) Both metaphysical and physical necessitation.

Robert Sleigh (Sleigh, Chappell, and Della Rocca 1998: 1264–1269) says (1), Robert
Adams (2),15 while I have argued for (3).
By ‘‘blind necessitation’’ Adams means necessitation by factors that are, as he
says, ‘‘value-free.’’ Adams points us toward a passage in which Leibniz explains at
least one problem he has with Spinozist necessitarianism.16 In the Theodicy Leibniz
mentions that Spinoza ‘‘appears to have explicitly taught a blind necessity, having
denied to the author of things understanding and will, and imagining that good and
perfection relate only to us and not to him’’ (T 173/H 234). Adams claims that
Leibniz here objects not so much to the necessitarianism, but to the blindness of the
necessity, that is, that the necessitation takes place without reference to ‘‘good and
perfection.’’ According to Adams, Leibniz rejects metaphysical and physical necessity in free choice, human and divine, not because they are necessitating, but
because they do not necessitate by way of ‘‘good and perfection.’’17 Moral necessity,
then, is necessitation-via-value.
I ﬁnd Adams’s interpretation interesting and plausible. It is not clear to me
what sorts of textual evidence might come to the surface that would sufﬁce for
deciding between his interpretation and my own. We both agree that freedom and
physical necessity are incompatible but for different reasons. Resolution will require that we turn to the question of what it is about physical and metaphysical
necessity that is problematic for Leibniz. I think the resources in the faculty
psychology texts will not help us here. However, I think that certain theological
texts give us good reason for thinking, at least, that it is the necessity, in addition to
the blindness, that is troubling for Leibniz. I will return to this point in the next
section.
What of Sleigh’s claim that, for Leibniz, even physical necessity is no threat to
freedom? There are two sorts of evidence in Sleigh’s favor. First, Leibniz sometimes says that metaphysical necessity is the only threat to freedom: ‘‘It will be
shown that absolute necessity, which is also called logical and metaphysical . . . and
which alone is to be feared, does not exist in free actions’’ (T, Preface/G 6:37).18 Of
course, such arguments must be handled with care. Perhaps Leibniz simply spoke
incautiously. More likely, Leibniz here mentions only those threats that are relevant or salient in context. As even Sleigh admits, there were few defenders of
efﬁcient causal determinism in this period. Necessitarians like Spinoza represented
the most salient threat for Leibniz. Perhaps efﬁcient causal compatibilists were
simply not worth resisting here.19

Spontaneity and Freedom

207

Second, in at least one place Leibniz writes as if moral and physical necessity
are modally equivalent:
[F]or it must be admitted that when one thing follows from another in the contingent realm, the kind of determining that is involved is not the same as when one
thing follows from another in the realm of the necessary. Geometrical and
metaphysical ‘followings’ necessitate, but physical and moral ones incline without
necessitating. (NE 2.21.13/RB 178)

This is a complex text. But what is important here is that Leibniz seems to assert
that physical and moral ‘‘followings’’ are modally equivalent. Whatever holds for
one seems to hold for the other. Thus, they are not distinct modalities after all, as
they are for the Jesuit moral necessitarians.20
It is hard to know how to weigh this text against others cited earlier. Leibniz
sometimes makes incompatible claims and we are left to judge on systematic
grounds how to best understand his intentions, all things considered. It seems to
me the preponderance of texts weighs against the Sleigh interpretation in this case.
Nonetheless, I think theological grounds, to which I will turn next, are the deciding element.
Let me add that it seems to me that many feel obliged to equate moral and
physical necessity because of our own contemporary suspicions about ﬁnal causality. Moral necessity is, as I have characterized it, intrinsically teleological. And
since, some seem to suppose, ﬁnal causes must ultimately be cashed out in terms of
efﬁcient causes, they must be similarly reducible for Leibniz. But contemporary
work in the metaphysics of freedom might perhaps persuade us to be more accommodating. Recent libertarians take ﬁnal causes to play an important role in the
explanation of action, a role not reducible to talk about efﬁcient causes.21 These
libertarians regard free actions to be entirely causally undetermined. Still, they
contend, a complete explanation of free action will make reference to the fact that
the agent chooses with the aim of satisfying one of the agent’s desires. In this way,
having desires is a necessary condition of an agent acting freely. And we might
even imagine that in some case such desires are sufﬁcient as well. For nothing
seems to prevent its being the case that I am at some point positioned in such a way
that I desire only a single course of action, including refraining from acting altogether. In such a case we might say that though an action is uncaused, nonetheless,
the fact that there is only one course of action (including refraining) that is desirable might necessitate that this course of action be chosen.22 I suspect this is the
sort of thing that the moral necessitarian Sousa had in mind in his own account.
Given that the will cannot help but incline most strongly toward that course of
action judged best, it acts in such a way that the action brought forth is aimed at
the satisfaction of that desire.
Of course, whether or not one is willing to admit this sort of account will
depend on exactly what account of causation one adopts. If causation is to be
cashed out simply in terms of the ability to support certain sorts of counterfactuals,
this account will not fare well. But if we think of causation as instead a real relation
between states of affairs or events, as Leibniz surely would when thinking of causal
relations between temporally adjacent states of a substance, then an account like

208 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

this seems to preserve the integrity of ﬁnal causes that are not ultimately reducible
to efﬁcient causes.
So, perhaps this is the sort of account we should favor when thinking about
Leibniz. It is fair to say that many of his intellectual predecessors held such a view of
ﬁnal causes in this context. And it seems to ﬁt well with his own talk about moral
necessity as distinct from physical necessity and metaphysical necessity. This gives
us a way of conceiving of what Leibniz is up to when it comes to the faculty
psychology of freedom, and this is the place where moral necessity is primarily put
to work.
What did Leibniz hope to gain from such spontaneity? On the one hand, this
is hard to answer because I know of no text in which Leibniz directly speaks to
the question. On the other hand, such an absence should lead us to believe that
he hoped to secure here what everyone hoped to secure by denying intellectual
determinism, namely, the sort of independence that allows the will to count as
genuinely active in the act of election. From the thirteenth century onward, critics
of intellectual determinism argued that it made the will passive and thus not
possibly free.23 There is no reason to think Leibniz’s own account would have
demanded less.

Freedom from Divine Necessitation
Unlike his Reformed counterparts, Leibniz also held that spontaneity required independence from divine determination. Here the motivation was as much to preserve the will’s freedom, as it was to preserve God from culpability for human sin:
For who would call into doubt that the mind thinks and wills, that we elicit in
ourselves many thoughts and volitions, and that there is a spontaneity that belongs
to us? If this were called into doubt, then not only would human liberty be denied
and the cause of evil things be thrust into God, but it would also ﬂy in the face of
the testimony of our innermost experience and consciousness, testimony by which
we ourselves sense that the things my opponents have transferred to God, without
even a pretense of reason, are ours. (G 4:510/AG 161)

There were many respects in which Leibniz believed free human action must
maintain independence from divine determination. In various texts, Leibniz considers the threat to freedom proposed by God’s activities of creating, conserving,
and concurring in human activity. Here I will focus on one controversial part
of Leibniz’s worries. The worry can be stated in brief as follows. God, when
considering the possible creature Adam, say, knows that Adam will choose to eat
the forbidden fruit. Given this, how can it be the case that God wills that Adam be
actual, without thereby coming to be the cause of Adam’s sin? If God were
the cause of Adam’s sin, this would undermine Adam’s freedom and make God
the ‘‘author of sin.’’ Leibniz argued that God avoids being the author of sin by not
causing but merely permitting the sin of Adam. But how is Leibniz going to make
this distinction between causing and permitting? As I will show, he does so by
arguing that the creature has a variety of spontaneity sufﬁcient to make it author of
its own acts.

Spontaneity and Freedom 209

One of Leibniz’s earliest attempts to grapple with the independence of human
free actions from God occurs in the Confessio Philosophi, where he attempts to
deﬂect responsibility for evil from God by arguing that God does not cause, but
merely permits, evil. Early in the dialogue he provides an account of permission
that can be summarized as follows.
P permits E if and only if:
(1)
(2)
(3)

P fails to will that E
P fails to will that not-E
P brings it about that state of affairs S obtains by willing that S
obtains
(4) If S obtains then E obtains
(5) P knows that (4)
(6) P believes that the good entailed by S’s obtaining outweighs the evil
entailed by E’s obtaining.24

Although Leibniz appears content with this view in the Confessio, concerns with
the view as described seem to arise in a series of texts from the mid-1680s. The most
critical one is De Libertate, Fato, Gratia Dei et Connexis.25 Among other things,
Leibniz is, in this piece, looking to solve a knotty theological problem in which he
had a keen interest, namely, the truthmaker for propositions of the form:
If person S were in circumstances C, then S would freely do action A.

In the discussion concerning divine providence there were two widely endorsed
Scholastic views on the truthmakers for such propositions, called conditional future contingents (CFCs), in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. The
ﬁrst view was primarily defended by Dominicans. The second view was defended
primarily by Jesuits. For the Dominicans, CFCs have as their truthmaker a divine
decree. It is, on their view, up to God whether or not Peter denies or performs
some other act in circumstances C. As a result, the truth value of CFCs is said to
be determined ‘‘postvolitionally.’’ The Jesuits held, on the contrary, that the truth
values of CFCs must be determined prevolitionally (i.e., independently of any act
of the divine will). The reason for this is the obvious one: if it is up to God what
I choose under particular circumstances, then, they argued, the choice could
not truly be free. Further, in those cases where what I choose is evil, God, it seems,
is the direct cause of my performing the evil act since it was due to his decree that
I chose to sin in those circumstances.
Surprisingly, even though Leibniz is aware that there is an issue concerning
what grounds the truth of CFCs, and he is aware of the competing solutions, it is
not something that he considers in any detail in his early career.26 However, when
we come to the period of 1685 through 1687, there is a ﬂurry of activity on Leibniz’s
part concerning this issue.
In De Libertate, Fato, Gratia Dei et Connexis, Leibniz deals with a wide
range of topics concerning human freedom and divine providence. After a brief
discussion of the problem of foreknowledge, Leibniz turns to the more complex
problem described earlier, namely, the truthmaker for CFCs. He introduces the
problem by citing the stock example in discussions of this topic, an example

210 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

springing from the biblical narrative in 1 Samuel 23. In the passage, David is
hiding from King Saul in the city of Keilah. David fears that Saul will besiege the
city and that the residents of the city will fail to protect him. Thus, David,
wondering whether or not he should ﬂee, inquires of God concerning whether
the residents of Keilah will, in fact, turn him over if Saul takes the city. God tells
him that they will, and David then ﬂees. Obviously, the knowledge that God has
revealed to David is not an item of simple divine foreknowledge, and for obvious reasons: the events described by David do not occur in the actual future.
The question here is what the Keilites would do, were some circumstances to
arise that do not in fact arise. In other words, God is herein displaying that he
has knowledge of conditional future contingents in a case where the antecedent
of the conditional is not satisﬁed. The question then is, in virtue of what does
God know what the Keilites will do, or, alternatively, in virtue of what is it the
case that,
(7) If the Keilites were in circumstances C (where Saul takes the city),
they would deliver David to Saul.

Leibniz then undertakes a defense of the Dominican view that the truthmaker for
(7) is the divine will. In the course of his defense, Leibniz reiterates the claim that
God is not the author of sin because rather than willing the sin, God merely
permits it.
Since Leibniz is defending the postvolitional, Dominican view, it is not at
all surprising that the series of criticisms he raises are the stock objections of the
prevolitionalist Jesuits. The ﬁrst two criticisms he raises pose the natural questions:
if CFCs have a decree of the divine will as their truthmaker, then it seems that
human freedom is precluded and, in light of this, it appears that sins ought to be
ascribed to God and not to the creature. In response to the second criticism
Leibniz sets forth a view much like the one we ﬁnd in the Confessio: God is not the
author of sin because he merely permits rather than wills the sin, and further such
permitting is excusable since the evil permitted results in a greater good. Thus, it
cannot be said that God wills sin since, on this view, ‘‘properly speaking, God does
not decree that Peter sin.’’
However, Leibniz was clearly dissatisﬁed with the view he lays out in this
paragraph since he subsequently struck the entire paragraph and replaced it with a
paragraph that goes in a quite different direction. What did Leibniz ﬁnd unsatisfactory about the postvolitional view? Recall that in the Confessio Leibniz not only
tells us that God’s relationship to sin in the world is one of mere permission, but he
goes on to give us a detailed account of the nature of permission. In that account,
the second condition was:
(2)

P fails to will not-E.

This second condition is necessary since, if God were to will that E not occur, E
would not occur. So, to make this account of permission work, Leibniz must be
able to hold that with respect to a token evil, Peter’s denial of Christ, that:
(30 )

It is not the case that God wills that Peter denies.

Spontaneity and Freedom

211

But in light of the account we have earlier, it looks like Leibniz is committed to the
following claims:
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

God wills that if Peter is in C, then Peter denies.
God wills that Peter exist.
God wills that C obtain.
God wills that Peter be in C.

It is hard to see, however, how Leibniz can coherently hold (8), (11), and (30 ) since
it is reasonable to assume (8) and (11) entail the denial of (30 ). But what is it that
Leibniz should surrender here? If he surrenders (30 ), then he must also surrender
his account of permission since surrendering (30 ) would violate the ﬁrst condition
of his account of permission (i.e., that God does not will E where E is Peter’s
denial). Surrendering (11) appears to carry a price too high to pay since (11) seems
to be required by any orthodox account of divine creation. If Leibniz wants to give
up (8), then he will have to surrender the claim that the divine will is the truthmaker for CFCs. This might not seem to be a very high price to pay. After all, the
view that something other than a divine decree acts as truthmaker for CFCs was a
view widely held by Jesuits, as I noted earlier. But the Jesuit view also required
holding a libertarian view of freedom that Leibniz could not accept. Thus, giving
up (8) would leave Leibniz in need of ﬁnding something else that could act as the
truthmaker of CFCs.
If the truth of the key conditional
(12) If Peter is in C, then Peter denies.

is not grounded in the divine will, what are the options? Perhaps Leibniz could
hold it to be a necessary truth. This would solve the problem of directly implicating
God in Peter’s sin. Peter sins because Peter must. It is essential to Peter that he
sin. However, Leibniz utterly rejects this move. Whatever the truthmaker for (8),
Leibniz is committed to the claim that it is not the divine will, and it is not that
Peter sins in C necessarily.27
Recall that if, as I claim, Leibniz is giving up the postvolitional view while
attempting to retain the Principle of Sufﬁcient Reason, he is now forced to look for
something that can act as the truthmaker for CFCs. In another text from the same
period, Leibniz begins to construct such an account by developing a view of the
relationship between God and the creaturely free act. He then employs this view to
answer the key question concerning the truthmaker for CFCs: Does God determine what the creature would do under speciﬁed circumstances, and if so, in what
respect? To this end he says:
It must be replied that the ﬁrst cause [God] is determined by the second cause [the
creature] taken ideally, i.e., the idea of the second perceived in the divine intellect
determines the will of the ﬁrst one, and the choosing of the second taken actually
is determined by the ﬁrst, or everything takes its being from him. (Grua 386)

In other words, we have an account quite akin to the prevolitional account.
God does not, by an act of will, determine what the creature would do under given
circumstances. But God, seeing what the creature would do, decides which

212 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

possible creature to create and in virtue of that creative decree, they come into
being.
But now the question becomes, what is the truthmaker for the CFC, if it is not
the divine decree? In other words, one might ask, when we abstract away considerations of the divine contributions toward the creaturely act, what is left that acts as
the ‘‘sufﬁcient reason’’ for the truth of the CFC? One of the issues that Leibniz was
clearly concerned about in this period is one that likewise occupied other prevolitionalists, namely, exactly what can be abstracted away from the creature’s
circumstances when God is considering what the creature will freely do? Or, to put
it another way, what elements of C (the circumstances) are necessary for the CFCs
having a determinate truth value? For example, it would appear that God cannot
abstract away from C considerations of all divine causal contribution at the time of
choice. Among God’s causal contributions would be his activity of sustaining the
creature in existence; but if necessary conditions for creaturely existence are not
preserved, neither is that creature’s existence or any action whatever—leaving the
corresponding CFC without a determinate truth value. In addition, since orthodox
metaphysicians held almost without exception that no causal power of a creature
could be exercised without some (concurring) act of the divine will, it appears that
determining what the creature would do in given circumstances would require
consideration of whatever was necessary for the act to occur, and thus to consider
not only God’s sustaining causal contribution, but some measure of God’s concurring contribution as well.28
In the next two paragraphs, Leibniz takes up just this question when he asks:
‘‘It is sought what it is in the human will that God attends to such that he chooses
to concur with one action rather than another’’ (Grua 386–387). He then proposes
his answer to the sufﬁcient reason question, taking up a position that, to my
knowledge, he holds for the remainder of his career:
But when rightly considered we must hold that the certainty of God arises from
the fact that He foresees that the mind will assent. It can be asked, whence he has
foreseen this connection? Entirely from the consideration of minds as much as of
graces, he knows both that which is the future state of mind and what grace will
superadd to it. . . . Because it is an impossible condition that a creature operate
without divine concurrence, it is impossible that God foresee what the creature,
per se, would do by the power of free will alone. So God can only foresee that to
which the creature is inclined. And so the matter is reduced to the doctrine of
inclination but not necessitation. (Grua 387–388; emphasis added)

The answer, then, is that it is the inclination of the creature prior to choice that
acts as (a) the truthmaker for the proposition, and further (b) that on which God
bases the nature of his concurrence with the free act. This view, I believe, was
suggested to Leibniz by a work he was reading at this time, and that he cites in
another connection slightly later in the same essay. The work is Louis of Dole’s
Concerning the Manner of the Concursus of God and Creatures. In the work, Dole
describes a view very much like the one mentioned by Leibniz. Dole writes:
God explores through the dictates of his middle knowledge the way in which the
created will is bending itself by way of its own liberty on such and such an

Spontaneity and Freedom

213

occasion and at such and such a moment in time so that as a result of this
prevision and foreknowledge, God determines himself and makes a resolve such
that he will manifest his concursus in this way rather than that at this particular
moment in time, and in such a manner that his concursus is toward willing rather
than nilling and toward willing this rather than that object. (Dola 1634: part 2,
chap. 1, 107)

And Leibniz comments favorably on this view.29 Thus, God ﬁrst foresees how it
is that the creature inclines, and from this knows how he will concur with the act of
the creature. These together sufﬁce to give God knowledge of the truth of the relevant CFC and thus, as Leibniz says in the passage I quoted earlier: ‘‘And so the
matter is reduced to the doctrine of inclination but not necessitation’’ (Grua 388).
We ﬁnd here the coming together of the two species of spontaneity. What makes the
free action genuinely the creature’s own, is the fact that it has an active will, which is
not psychologically determined, and which is not necessitated by divine action on
creatures.
I urged in the fourth section that theological consideration seemed relevant, if
not decisive, when considering Leibniz’s case against the consistency of physical
necessity and freedom. The reason should now be clear. Leibniz expends a great
deal of effort making the case that causal determination of creaturely acts (by God
in this case) is sufﬁcient to deﬂect moral responsibility away from the creature (and
toward the ultimate cause, in this case God). If Leibniz were satisﬁed with the
compatibility of freedom and causal determinism, such worries would simply
never arise. And yet they do. This is, it seems to me, very powerful evidence of
anticompatibilist sympathies in Leibniz’s thought. What is more, whatever case can
be pressed against divine determinism can be equally forcefully made against
garden-variety efﬁcient causal determinism in choice. To block this, one would
need a buffer analogous to the one Leibniz installs between God and creatures.
Jesuit moral necessity provides just such a buffer.

Conclusion
In the introduction I noted that compatibilists and libertarians have appealed to
distinct pairs of reasons or guiding intuitions in defending their views on freedom. In both cases, one member of the pair is strictly metaphysical, while the
other is theological. In light of the varieties of spontaneity that Leibniz aims to
defend, we can now ask: where do his overall sympathies lie here? The answer is,
as is typical for Leibniz, a mixed one. Surely, Leibniz has no sympathy at all with
the ﬁrst libertarian intuition, that is, that freedom is incompatible with sufﬁcient
conditions for choice. Rather, his sympathies here run in parallel with the
compatibilist intuition that free actions require that the act be generated by
certain internal states of the agent. In Leibniz’s case, these internal states are
deliverances of practical reason that are in turn a species of clear perception.
Still, while endorsing this intuition, Leibniz also seems to want to argue that the
act generated by practical reason is not, strictly speaking, efﬁcient causally determined by it.

214 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

On the theological side, however, Leibniz comes down squarely on the libertarian side. Seventeenth-century theologians were well aware of the implications
of straightforward compatibilism for the problem of evil. If God wills that certain
events occur by means of deterministic processes that he implements, God is the
author of those events. And thus, if the sinful acts of creatures are causally determined, God is the author of sin. Leibniz distances himself from this objection by
ﬁrst arguing that the actions of free creatures under speciﬁed circumstances are not
under the control of the divine will. Thus, transitions between states within freely
willing rational substances are not under immediate divine control. Rather, the
transition from state to state in such substances is ﬁxed by morally necessitated ﬁnal
causality. Since this sort of relation between intellect and will, and correspondingly, between successive states of the substance, is sufﬁcient to secure spontaneity
(or so Leibniz believes), and since it is on such grounds that God governs his own
concurrence with the actions of substances, divine causal involvement in creaturely free acts neither destroys freedom nor implicates God in sin.
As a result, the texts indicate a Leibniz who is not as sympathetic with fullblown compatibilism as he is sometimes held to be. Does mitigated Leibnizian
compatibilism succeed in doing what Leibniz proposes for it? The answer to this
question depends on whether or not tolerably good sense can be made of Leibniz’s
appropriation of moral necessity. If, as some of Leibniz’s contemporaries claimed,
there is no logical space for a modality that is weaker than physical necessity, then
physical and moral necessity will collapse, as will Leibniz’s view. But if moral
necessity as described is defensible, the view merits closer scrutiny.

Notes
1. See also T 59, 65, 290, 302, k20 (respectively G 6:135, 138, 289, 296, 421–422); also G 6:455/S 137;
G 3:364; G 4:483–484/AG 143, and elsewhere.
2. This account also seems to be in play at G 7:109; G 2:69; G 3:402/AG 195; NE 2.21.12; G 3:70/
WF 131. The reader should take note of the fact that I have altered the translation of Woolhouse and
Francks at a key point. They render ‘‘Mais on a raison dans un autre sens d’appeller perturbations. . . . ce
qui consiste dans les pensées confuses, où il y a de l’involontaire de et l’inconnu’’ as ‘‘In another sense,
however, it is reasonable to call those things which consist in confused thoughts, and in which there is
involuntariness and incomprehension, perturbations.’’
3. This account also seems to be in play in the Arnauld correspondence, G 2:47. See also G 6:
138–139.
4. Leibniz sometimes even appears willing to talk about deliverances of the practical intellect
causing volitions. See, e.g., NE 2.21.13.
5. See also G 6:300. I should note that some might charge that I have unfairly truncated the
quotation. I deny the charge. Leibniz later in the passage goes on to deny metaphysically necessitating
conditions for choice. But in this ﬁrst part it is clear that physically necessitating conditions are in view.
6. See, for example, Aquinas, ST 1a2ae, q. 10, a. 1, ad2um, and De Malo, q. 16, a. 7, ad18um.
7. See Scotus 1950: 2, q. 39, a. 2, n. 5, and Molina 1953: disp. 2, n. 9.
8. For more details on these various views, see Murray 1996: 31–37.
9. For more detailed renderings of these views one can consult Murray 1996: 27–37.
10. One might wonder how this view differs substantially from the earlier intellectualist view. The
answer is that it is rather more of a bold development. The intellectualists endorsed the sufﬁciency of
practical judgment for choice, and also denied that practical judgment could necessitate the will. But
there was no uniﬁed strategy for making sense of this nonefﬁcient-causal sufﬁciency. As mentioned

Spontaneity and Freedom

215

earlier, the most widely endorsed strategy was to hold that practical judgments were not causally
sufﬁcient in an efﬁcient sense since the will was a proximate cause of the intellect forming the last
judgment. This was unsatisfying for reasons already described. There were other minority strategies
attempted as well. But this represents the ﬁrst explicit attempt to address the intellectualist worries by
forging an attenuated sense of necessitation. For a more detailed treatment of this movement see Murray
1996: 37–43 and Knebel 1991a: 3–24.
11. Note that Sousa makes it clear that the necessity in play here is strictly necessitas moralis.
12. The claims that Leibniz make concerning God and the beatiﬁed do not undercut the interpretation offered here. Note that Leibniz only likens (quodammodo) God’s choosing to cases of physical
necessitation. As for the blessed, the standard view was that since they were in the presence of God, and
thus could see God ‘‘in his essence,’’ they were physically necessitated in choosing, since ‘‘loving God as
seen in his essence’’ is the one practical activity that necessitates the will in this way.
13. See also NE 2.21.13; T 51/G 6:130; Grua 253, 272, 276, 301.
14. For a defense of these claims see Murray 1996: 51–53.
15. Adams, ‘‘Moral Necessity,’’ in this volume.
16. T 173/G 6:217.
17. Adams, ‘‘Moral Necessity,’’ this volume.
18. Sleigh also points to T 44, 302, 367 (respectively, G 6:127, 296, 333); G 3:401; and Grua 480–481.
19. Though, as we saw earlier, Leibniz does, in an appendix to the same work, distance himself
from Hobbesian compatibilism. In addition, there are notable cases in which Leibniz has the opportunity to endorse this form of compatibilism and does not. For example, Francois Lamy challenges
Leibniz with the remark that the sort of full-blown causal determinism that he takes Leibniz to endorse
is not compatible with freedom (WF 147, from the original De la Connoissance de soi-même, second
edition, 1699). Leibniz replies by denying that the sort of connection between states of a substance is
causally determined in the way Lamy claims (WF 154–155, 167).
20. Many understand Leibniz in this way, e.g., Grua 1953: 234 and Vailati 1997: Introduction.
21. See for example: O’Connor 1995: 173–200 and Ginet 1995: 69–94.
22. Peter van Inwagen (1995) defends such a possibility.
23. William de la Mere is widely known for directing the Franciscan attack on Thomism on this
point in the fourteenth century. Voluntarist critics of the intellectualist view sustained the charge at least
through the sixteenth century. For more on this one can consult Kent 1995: 106.
24. This summary derives from the portion of the text at A 6.3:129–131.
25. Grua 306–322 and A 6.4:1595–1612. This piece carries a date of 1686–87. Other important
pieces treating the topic in the period are: Aus Ludovicus a Dola, De Modo Conjunctionis Concursuum
Dei et Creaturum (A 6.4:1789–1792), and De Libertate et Gratia (Grua 384–388/A 6.4:1455–1459).
26. It is discussed brieﬂy on a few occasions, however. For example, see C 26–27. Leibniz says
things that suggest that he holds the view I claim he held prior to 1685. Here he seems to adopt the
postvolitional view concerning CFCs when he says, ‘‘God knows future absolute things because He
knows what He decreed; and future conditionals because He knows what He would have decreed’’ (A
6.1:545–546; 1670). Leibniz seems to lean in the opposite direction (toward the prevolitional view). But
here Leibniz only makes a brief mention of the prevolitional view without giving any endorsement of it.
27. The ﬁrst portion of this section was previously published in Murray 2000: 81–84. Cover and
Hawthorne (2000b) have replied to the claim I make there by arguing that regarding (12) as a necessary
truth would not commit Leibniz to the necessity of the consequent.
Why then does Leibniz strike the postvolitionalist language in the ﬁrst draft? Cover and Hawthorne contend that what Leibniz found troublesome was merely (8). Closure under willed material
implication does seem to invite the judgment that God is culpable for human sin. However, (12) can be
necessary and known true by God, without inviting the same judgment since willing under known
material implication is (one might hold) not similarly closed. Thus, Leibniz’s denial of the necessity of
the consequent does not settle the modal status of the conditional.
The position Cover and Hawthorne defend merits a longer reply than I can provide here. To assess
the plausibility of their reply one needs to consider just what it is in virtue of which the conditional is
necessarily true. Here are a couple of sources of the necessity that might suggest themselves: (a) the
nature of complete concepts (if, for example, Leibniz were a superessentialist), and (b) facts about

216 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
which world is best and the necessity of God’s willing to actualize the best world. Both of these would
raise obvious problems. But then what does ground the necessity? I think that ultimately there are no
grounds to be found that would do the work Leibniz needs done, and that this explains why he does not
(here) avail himself of this answer. Still, it is fair to note that the sort of strategy Cover and Hawthorne
ascribe to Leibniz looks very much like the ‘‘hypothetical necessity’’ strategy endorsed in other texts in
this period.
28. The most detailed contemporary treatment of the discussion of this issue among sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century ﬁgures is found in Knebel 1991b: 262–294.
29. A 6.4:1791.

11

Leibniz Against Molinism
Freedom, Indifference, and the
Nature of the Will
SEAN GREENBERG

he problem of free will is standardly taken to arise from a tension between
1
In approaching early modern accounts of freedom from this interpretive standpoint, it is assumed, somewhat uncritically, that early modern philosophers conceived of the problem of freedom in
the same way that we do. I believe that this assumption is mistaken. Early modern
approaches to the problem of freedom were cast in terms of conceptions of the
mind, and, in particular, of conceptions of the will. Considerations about the nature
of the mind feature far less prominently in contemporary discussions of freedom,
and consideration of the will is altogether absent, because the will no longer ﬁgures
in our conception of the mind. Peter van Inwagen has drawn attention to this
change, remarking that

T human freedom and causal determinism.

the ascription of free will to an agent . . . does not imply that the agent has a
‘faculty’ called ‘the will.’ It was not always so. Once upon a time, to say that X ‘had
free will’ was to imply that X had something called a ‘will’ and that this will was
not only unimpeded by external circumstances . . . but that X’s internal constitution left him ‘free’ to ‘will’ in various ways. . . . A tradition, however, is a changeable
thing, and the classical tradition has abandoned these implications of the words
‘free will.’ (Van Inwagen 1995: 220)

Van Inwagen’s remark is provocative: someone of a historical bent might well
wonder when and why the ‘‘classical tradition’’ abandoned its commitment to the
faculty of the will, and whether this abandonment had any implications for how we
conceive of the problem of freedom.
These questions merit extended discussion; I will not be able to give it to them
here. I do, however, want to take some steps toward opening up these questions,
which have been raised in some earlier histories, but have nevertheless not yet
received the attention that I believe they deserve.2 I propose to illustrate the value
217

218 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

of considering the problem of freedom from the perspective of the nature of the
mind (and will) by showing how this approach offers a fresh perspective on
Leibniz’s criticisms of the Molinist conception of freedom.3
The Molinist account of freedom, so called after the Spanish Jesuit philosopher and theologian Luis de Molina, was characterized in the following formulation well known to early modern philosophers: a man is free, given that with all
the requisites for action having been posited, he is able to act or not act. On this
account, agents are said to be ‘‘indifferent’’ with respect to their choices, because
they determine themselves to choose as they do on the basis of perceptions, desires,
and so on, the ‘‘requisites for action’’: in other words, the requisites for action do
not determine the agent’s choice.
Molina originally developed this doctrine in order to account for the relation
between human agency and divine grace as part of the Counter-Reformation
attempt to counter Lutheran and Calvinist doctrines of the servitude of man.4 Yet a
wide range of early modern thinkers, including Samuel Pufendorf, John Bramhall,
and Samuel Clarke, adapted versions of this account of freedom to their own,
different, philosophical problems.5 Leibniz’s criticisms of the Molinist conception
of freedom, like the criticisms of his contemporaries Thomas Hobbes, Ralph
Cudworth, and John Locke, center on the notion of indifference central to the
Molinist deﬁnition of freedom, and he pursues a line of criticism akin to theirs.
These philosophers all claim that the indifference required for Molinist freedom
implies that an agent might be able to choose for no reason at all.6
On the face of it, such criticisms do not touch the Molinist position, because
the Molinists do not actually claim that a free agent chooses for no reason at all.
Although commentators have tried to sharpen Leibniz’s objections to Molinism, to
my mind, these attempts have not gone far enough. In this essay, I try to go further
by tracing Leibniz’s criticisms of Molinism to the divergences between his conception of mind and that of the Molinists.
I lay the foundation of my discussion by sketching the Molinist account of
freedom, focusing on Francisco Suárez’s formulation of the position in Disputation
19 of the Metaphysical Disputations (MD).7 I then turn to Leibniz’s criticisms of
the Molinist account of freedom, arguing that the target of these criticisms is the
conception of the will that underlies that account of freedom. Leibniz objects to the
Molinist conception of freedom as he does because there is no place for the Molinist will in the Leibnizian mind.8 Indeed, I believe that Leibniz not only rejects
the Molinist will, but that he wants to account for freedom without recourse to the
will. This last claim may strike some readers as implausible, given that Leibniz uses
the term ‘will’ in his writings and seems to want to give an account of what it is to
will freely. Yet we should not make too much of the fact that Leibniz uses this term:
on account of his oft-stated aim to reconcile various opposing philosophical positions, Leibniz often appropriates the language of those positions. The question is
whether there is a functional analogue of the Molinist will in the Leibnizian mind,
and what role that functional analogue plays in Leibniz’s conception of freedom.
I argue that the Leibnizian will has no distinct functional role to play in Leibniz’s
conception of freedom, and conclude by assessing the signiﬁcance and success of
Leibniz’s attempt to account for human freedom without recourse to the will.

Leibniz Against Molinism 219

Suárez on Freedom and Indifference
Suárez’s account of human freedom forms a part of his discussion of efﬁcient
causality, and arises in the context of his attempt to explain the conditions under
which efﬁcient causes act.9 In particular, Suárez seeks to explicate the difference
between ‘‘free’’ and ‘‘natural’’ efﬁcient causes—that is, the distinction between
rational agents, such as humans, angels, and God, and all other created things.
According to Suárez, natural causes may only act if they are determined to one
thing, whereas free causes may act even if they are not determined—that is, if they
are indifferent—with respect to any particular thing. This difference is reﬂected in
the deﬁnitions that Suárez gives of these types of cause. A natural cause is one such
that with all the requisites for acting having been posited, it must act (MD 19.1.1); a
free cause is such that with all the requisites for acting having been posited, it can
either act or not act (MD 19.4.9).10
The following example derived from Freddoso (1986) may help to clarify
Suárez’s distinction between natural and free causes. Provided that all conditions
are normal and barring miracles, if one turns the knob on one’s stove, the burner
will light. The stove will fail to light only if not all the conditions are normal—for
example, if the gas is not on, or the pilot light is out—in other words, if there is some
‘‘requisite’’ of the stove’s lighting that is not in place in the actual situation. Given
that a gas burner is the kind of thing that will produce only one effect, provided that
all the conditions that are required for it to produce that effect are in place, it is not
indifferent with respect to that effect, and may be said to be naturally necessitated.
In contrast, if a human being sees a tasty piece of cake, and desires it, she is not
determined to eat the cake, but must choose to eat it. Although the sight of a tasty
piece of cake is a necessary condition for the agent choosing to eat the cake, it is
not a sufﬁcient condition, for the agent must also decide that the cake is indeed
something that she wants. Suárez proposes two deﬁnitions of causation in order to
emphasize the fact that the actions of natural causes are entirely determined by the
‘‘requisites for action,’’ whereas free causes are naturally indifferent to their actions,
and must therefore determine themselves to action (MD 19.2.18–22).
The heart of Suárez’s discussion of freedom is devoted to explaining how free
causes may determine themselves, given that it is in virtue of this power of selfdetermination that free causes differ from natural causes (MD 19.2.18). According
to Suárez,
a free faculty’s indifference is preserved in a satisfactory way primarily and precisely through the faculty’s relation to the act or to the absence of the act. This is
usually called freedom with respect to exercise, since it is by virtue of this freedom
that the very exercise of the act is indifferent. (MD 19.4.9)

In accordance with the Aristotelian tradition, Suárez maintains that human beings
are free—they enjoy freedom of exercise—because they have both intellects and
wills (MD 19.5, 21). Suárez’s speciﬁc problem, then, is to determine whether the
intellect or the will has freedom of exercise. In Suárez’s terminology, the question
is that of determining which faculty is ‘‘formally’’ free.

220 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Suárez maintains that a faculty may have freedom of exercise only if it is intrinsically voluntary, that is, if the very action of the faculty is voluntary (MD 19.5.17).
Intrinsic voluntariness is here contrasted with extrinsic voluntariness, which arises
from the voluntariness of the faculty that brings about the action. For example,
walking is extrinsically voluntary because it arises from one’s decision to move one’s
limbs, and it is voluntary only because the decision to move one’s limbs is voluntary
(MD 19.5.17). According to Suárez, only the action of the appetitive faculty—the
will—is intrinsically voluntary, and only the will may determine itself (MD 19.5.18).
Consequently, it is in virtue of the nature of the will that a free agent ‘‘may act or not
act, with all the requisites for action having been posited.’’ Because the indifference
attributed to the free agent in the Molinist deﬁnition of freedom is secured by the
will, the will lies at the heart of Molinist freedom.

The Chimera of Molinism
Leibniz criticized the Molinist conception of freedom throughout his philosophical career (A 6.3:132–133; A 6.4:1408–1409; A 6.6:196–197). In the Conversation with
Steno, one of his earliest writings on freedom, Leibniz maintained that ‘‘the definition of freedom—that it is the power of acting or of not acting, with all the
requisites for acting having been posited . . . is an impossible chimera. . . . This
concept of freedom was unknown in antiquity. . . . It was announced by the later
Scholastics’’ (A 6.4:1380). Tellingly, Leibniz did not originally attribute this innovation so generally to ‘‘the later Scholastics’’: as noted in Sleigh, Chappell, and
Della Rocca (1998: 1258–1259), Leibniz originally wrote: ‘‘This concept of freedom
was unknown in antiquity. . . . It was announced by the Molinists.’’11 In the
Theodicy, Leibniz continues to pursue this line of criticism against the Molinists.
He urges:
[O]ne must not imagine that our freedom consists in an indetermination or an
indifference of equilibrium; as if one had to be inclined equally to the side of the
yes or no, or to different choices, if there is more than one to make. This equilibrium is in any case impossible . . . this equilibrium is also absolutely contrary to
experience. (T 35)

In the remarks on King’s Essay on the Origin of Evil appended to the Theodicy,
Leibniz notes that King, following the later Scholastics, claims that ‘‘true liberty
depends on an indifference of equilibrium, vague, entire, and absolute, so that there
is no reason to determine oneself, prior to that determination, neither in the agent
who chooses, nor in the object’’ (G 6:401/H 406).
Leibniz consistently objects to the assumption of the Molinist account of
freedom that in free choice there must exist an ‘‘indifference of equilibrium.’’
According to Leibniz, the Molinist free agent is like Buridan’s apocryphal ass,
placed between two equally appetizing piles of hay, with no reason to choose
either, although, in the end, the agent (unlike the ass) is somehow able to make a
choice.12 Ex hypothesi, the agent is able to choose for no reason at all. According to
Leibniz, the choice that the Molinist account allows may be made in this situation

Leibniz Against Molinism

221

is an ‘‘impossible chimera’’ that violates the principle of sufﬁcient reason. Moreover, Leibniz claims that the choice situation that seems to be presupposed in the
example is also impossible, because it requires that the universe could be divided
into identical parts, thereby violating the principle of the identity of indiscernibles
(T 49). Because the conditions that the Molinist deﬁnition of freedom places on
free choice can never be met, the Molinist account of freedom is itself an ‘‘impossible chimera.’’
These various criticisms of Molinism form a somewhat heterogeneous collection, although they are all centered around the principle of sufﬁcient reason.
In order to uncover the heart of Leibniz’s objections to Molinism, I want ﬁrst to
consider the resources available to Suárez to respond to Leibniz’s explicit objections to Molinism. I argue that Suárez has the resources both to respond to these
objections and to a more general objection to Molinism based on the principle
of sufﬁcient reason itself. I believe, however, that a deeper objection to Molinism
based on the nature of the mind is implicit in Leibniz’s various appeals to the
principle of sufﬁcient reason, and I go on to show how attention to this objection
draws out the differences between Leibniz’s position and that of the Molinists.
Suárez agrees with Leibniz that the Buridan’s ass scenario could not actually
occur (MD 19.1.9). Moreover, he agrees with Leibniz that if an ass could be placed
in the imagined situation—that is, if an ass were placed between two equally
appetizing piles of hay—it would not be able to make a choice. Because the ass
could not be determined to any one thing, all the requisites for its action would not
be in place, and so it would not act at all, because natural causes are such that they
cannot act unless all the requisites for acting are in place. Suárez explains that
the sentient appetitive faculty can operate only in conjunction with a sufﬁcient
proposal of and movement by the object. But this is lacking in the present case,
since neither of the objects in question is apprehended without qualiﬁcation as
something to be loved and pursued, as is required in order for the appetitive
faculty’s effect to follow necessarily. Moreover, the reason why that sort of apprehension or judgment is not had in this case is that the objects mutually impede
one another as long as they produce equal movement and resistance within their
mode of causing. (MD 19.1.9)

Because the ass has only a sensitive appetite that must be determined to one thing
if the ass is to act, the ass would be unable to act in the imagined situation. If, per
impossibile, an agent were placed in this situation, she would not be in the same
sorry state as an ass, because an agent has a will and may determine herself to one
thing rather than to another. However, in determining herself in this way, an agent
does not choose for no reason, as Leibniz charges: rather, the reason for which the
agent chooses does not determine her to that one thing alone, and consequently
she is indifferent (in Suárez’s sense of ‘indifferent’) with respect to that thing. While
there is a reason why the agent chooses as she does, that reason alone is not sufﬁcient
to explain why she chooses as she does: one must also make reference to the agent’s
choice itself in order to account for why that choice was made.
Leibniz would claim that the Molinist has not gone far enough here, because
an insufﬁcient reason is no better than no reason at all. According to Leibniz,

222 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

a sufﬁcient reason explains why some event happened rather than another, and
determines that event to take place (T 44). But the choice attributed to the agent by
the Molinists seems not to admit of such an explanation. Most commentators take
this implication of the Molinist conception of freedom to be the underlying target
of Leibniz’s invocations of the principle of sufﬁcient reason against the Molinists,
and they seem to believe that this criticism hits the mark (Davidson 1996: 104–105;
Vailati 1997: 92–101). Sleigh gives especially good expression to this line of interpretation, writing:
Leibniz characterized a sufﬁcient cause or reason for the obtaining of some state of
affairs a as a total set of requisites for the obtaining of a. The principle of sufﬁcient
reason requires that, if a obtains, there is a sufﬁcient cause or reason why it obtains.
Leibniz also held that if a sufﬁcient cause or reason for some state of affairs a
obtained, then a obtains. Put these items together with Molina’s characterization of
freedom and it is clear why Leibniz regarded it as an impossible chimera. (Sleigh
et al. 1998: 1259)

Sleigh’s reconstruction of Leibniz’s criticism of Molinism does seem plausibly to
capture the motivation behind Leibniz’s invocation of the principle of sufﬁcient
reason in his criticisms of Molinism, but I do not believe that this criticism would
tell against the Molinists.
Leibniz’s criticism of Molinism rests on his deﬁnition of a sufﬁcient reason as
the ‘‘total set of requisites for the obtaining of some state of affairs.’’ Given this
deﬁnition, the Molinist account of freedom does indeed seem to imply that the
‘‘total set of requisites’’ does not produce some particular state of affairs. Yet Suárez
anticipates this objection. He distinguishes two kinds of requisites for action: antecedent requisites are what is required if the will is to determine itself; concomitant
requisites include the determination of the will (MD 19.4.10). In claiming that
the Molinist account of freedom implies that a choice may arise indifferently from
the ‘‘total set of requisites,’’ Leibniz seems to take the Molinist deﬁnition of freedom to apply to concomitant requisites and therefore does not seem to distinguish
between the conditions that must be in place for the will to determine itself and
the action that includes the determination of the will. Suárez articulates the signiﬁcance of this distinction:
For just as the action is required for acting, so too whatever is included in the
action can be said to be required. Now the action is required as that whereby the
faculty is formally determined and as that whereby it is constituted as actually
acting; and for this reason the action cannot be included among those conditions
in the presence of which the faculty has to be indifferent with respect to acting or
not acting, since this involves an obvious contradiction. Therefore, neither should
one include among those required things anything at all that pertains to the intrinsic nature of the action or is essentially included in the action. For the same
argument that applies to the action applies to these things as well. (MD 19.4.12)13

The Molinist deﬁnition of freedom—a man is free, given that with all the requisites having been posited, he is able to act or not to act—is meant only to capture
the conditions that must be in place if the will is to determine itself freely. Thus it
is not meant to apply to the ‘‘total requisites of action’’ as Leibniz believes.

Leibniz Against Molinism

223

Leibniz’s objection based on the principle of sufﬁcient reason seems to
miss the Molinist position, because he neglects the crucial role that the will plays
in the Molinist account of freedom that accounts for the agent’s ‘‘indifference’’
with respect to her choice. Nevertheless, I believe that further consideration of
Leibniz’s objections to Molinism based on the principle of sufﬁcient reason can
uncover a deeper aspect of Leibniz’s criticisms of Molinism that reﬂects some
sensitivity to the signiﬁcance of the will in Molinist freedom.
Leibniz maintains that it needs to be asked ‘‘how it was possible that some
determination should ﬁnally arise, for which there was no source: for to say with
Molina that it is the privilege of the free cause is to say nothing, it is to give it the
privilege of being chimerical’’ (T 48; see G 2:420). Leibniz’s remark here is directed against the Molinist claim that an agent, a free cause, may determine
herself, although this determination does not arise from any preceding circumstances but from the will itself. In this respect, the self-determination essential
to the Molinist account of freedom does seem to violate the principle of sufﬁcient
reason. The Jesuit Molinists’ Scholastic opponents, the Dominicans, had standardly made just this sort of criticism, charging that the Molinists made the will
a ‘self-moved mover’ that determines itself for no reason, and Murray (1996: 44)
has suggested that Leibniz is here launching a similar objection to the Molinist
position.
In a later section of the Theodicy, Leibniz sharpens this criticism. He explains:
To wish that a determination comes from a complete and absolutely indeterminate indifference is to wish that it comes naturally from nothing. It is supposed
that God does not give this determination: it therefore has its source neither in the
soul, nor in the body, nor in the circumstances, because everything is supposed
absolutely indeterminate; and that here nevertheless it appears and exists, without
any preparation, without any thing that disposes it to that action, without an angel
or even God able to know or to show anyone how it exists. And not only does it
arise from nothing, it arises on its own. (T 320; emphasis added)

The Molinist does believe that choices arise from the soul, in particular, from the
will, and also believes that these choices do take place naturally, because the will is
naturally indifferent to particular things, and therefore equally naturally has the
power to determine itself (MD 19.8.17–18). But Leibniz has a different conception
of the nature of the mind from the Molinists, and indeed from the Scholastics
more generally, which I think underwrites his criticism of Molinism and to which
I now want to turn.
In the late formulation of his metaphysics, the Monadology, Leibniz explains
that monads consist of perceptions and appetitions (Mon 15–16).14 In the Principles of Nature and of Grace 2, Leibniz offers a similar formulation, explaining
that
one monad by itself and at a single moment cannot be distinguished from another
except by its internal qualities and actions, and these can only be its perceptions—
that is to say, the representations of the compound, or of that which is without, in
the simple—and its appetitions, that is to say, its tendencies from one perception
to another, which are the principles of change. (G 6:598/L 636)

224

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

In these works, Leibniz seems to suggest that two principles are required in order
to specify the nature of the mind: perceptions, or representations, and appetitions,
the ‘‘principles of change’’ that determine the transition from one perception to
another.
In other late texts, however, Leibniz suggests that perceptions are more fundamental to the mind than appetitions, and that there is merely a theoretical
distinction between perception and appetition.15 In a letter to Christian Wolff,
Leibniz explains:
In truth, whatever is in the soul may be understood generally to be reduced to two
things: the soul’s harmonious expression, in accordance with the body, of the
present state of external things, and the endeavor to a new expression that represents the endeavor of bodies (or external things) to a future state, in a word,
perception and tending towards perception. (GLW 56)16

Although there may be a theoretical or conceptual distinction between appetitions
and perceptions, these remarks suggest that there is no functional distinction between them.
This point is relevant to understanding Leibniz’s conception of the will.
According to Leibniz, intelligent substances—the only free substances—do not
merely have appetitions, they may also be conscious of them, and this consciousness
of appetitions constitutes the human will. This idea may be found in a variety of
Leibniz’s mature philosophical works. In a fragment written in the early 1680s, he
deﬁnes the will as ‘‘the tendency to acting of which we are conscious’’ (A 6.4:1444).
He elaborates on this deﬁnition in the New Essays, explaining that ‘‘volition is the
effort or endeavour (conatus) to move towards what one ﬁnds good and away from
what one ﬁnds bad, the endeavour arising immediately out of one’s awareness of
those things’’ (A 6.6:172). The concluding clause of the preceding passage reﬂects
the same reductionism with respect to appetitions as the passage from the letter to
Wolff. Indeed, in several passages, Leibniz suggests that—to borrow an expression
from Murray17—choices are the vector sum of the appetitions that arise out of
various perceptions. For example, in the New Essays, Leibniz explains that ‘‘various
perceptions and inclinations combine to produce a complete volition: it is the result
of the conﬂict amongst them’’ (A 6.6:192), and he remarks that ‘‘everything
which . . . impinges on us weighs in on the balance and contributes to determining a
resultant direction, almost as in mechanics’’ (A 6.6:193). Because the Leibnizian
will is not functionally distinct from perceptions, it lacks the functional independence from perceptions (from the deliverances of the intellect) of the Molinist
will, and therefore cannot play the functional role that the Molinists attributed to
the will.
This difference between Leibniz’s conception of the will and that of the
Molinists comes out especially clearly in their discussions of the proper objects of
the faculties of the mind. In the Metaphysical Disputations, Suárez tries to illustrate the difference between the intellect and the will by contrasting the relation
between the intellect and its proper object, the true, and that between the will and
its proper object, the good. Suárez explains:

Leibniz Against Molinism

225

The formal object of the intellect is truth, and truth and falsity cannot exist in the
same object and so the intellect—both of itself and as regards the merit of its
object—is always determined to one effect with respect to the species of its act.
Hence, if in some cases it is not adequately determined, this is only because the
object is not sufﬁciently proposed or sufﬁciently apparent, and not because the intellect itself has an internal power or control over its own act. By contrast, the object of the will is the good, and one and the same object can be simultaneously
both good and evil—that is, both ﬁtting and unﬁtting in relation to different things
or under different aspects. And so even if the object is perfectly proposed or
cognized, the appetitive faculty [the will] can be indifferent . . . with respect to
pursuing or rejecting such an object. (MD 19.5.16)

The crucial point for my purposes is the contrast that Suárez draws here between
the intellect and the will. The intellect is naturally necessitated to assent to what is
true and dissent from what is false, and because it is determined by its objects, it
cannot determine itself. By contrast, the will is not naturally necessitated to
any particular good or any particular end, and therefore the will must determine
itself to some particular good or end. Suárez’s point is that the nature of the will is
such that it must determine itself, while the intellect cannot do so.
In the Theodicy, Leibniz comments on the conception of the relation between
the intellect and the will common to the Aristotelian tradition.
And with respect to the parallel between the relation of the intellect to the true
and the will to the good, it must be noted that a clear and distinct perception of a
truth actually contains within itself the afﬁrmation of this truth and therefore the
intellect is necessitated by it. But whatever perception one has of the good, the
effort of acting after this judgment, which to my mind is of the essence of the will,
is distinguished from this perception. Thus, because time is required to effect this
effort, it can be suspended and even changed by a new perception. (T 311)

Like Suárez, Leibniz here distinguishes between the functioning of the intellect
and of the will, and locates the difference between these faculties in their relation
to their proper objects. According to Leibniz, the difference between the intellect
and the will consists in the fact that the determination of the will—the effort or
tendency that derives from the perception of the object—may only be diverted by
other tendencies, arising from other objects, before it attains its end. Although
according to Leibniz there is a difference between the intellect and the will that
reﬂects the nature of those faculties, the Leibnizian will has no self-determining
power, and is intrinsically as determined by the good as the intellect is by the true.
Consequently, the nature of the Leibnizian mind rules out the real use of the will
by the agent required by the Molinist account of freedom.
Leibniz’s criticism of Molinism thus cuts more deeply than that of the Dominicans, to which it seems to bear some similarity, because the Dominicans
shared the Jesuit Molinists’ conception of the faculties of the mind and simply
disagreed with them about the nature of the interaction of these faculties. Leibniz,
by contrast, rejects this conception of the mind altogether.18 Indeed, I think that
Leibniz’s repeated appeals to the principle of sufﬁcient reason against the Molinists may be seen as reﬂecting the differences between his conception of the mind

226 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

and that of the Molinists. Because the Molinist account of freedom appeals to a
notion of the will that does not ﬁt in the Leibnizian mind, Leibniz believes that the
Molinist account of freedom does not have a sufﬁcient foundation in the nature of
the mind. From Leibniz’s perspective, what is chimerical about Molinist freedom
is the Molinist will.

Leibnizian Freedom and the Leibnizian Mind
Leibniz’s and Suárez’s accounts of freedom reﬂect the differences in their conceptions of the mind and will. Some consideration of the deﬁnition of freedom
that Leibniz proposes in the Theodicy will help to illustrate this claim. According
to Leibniz,
freedom, such as is required in the theological schools, consists in intelligence,
which includes a distinct knowledge of the object of deliberation; in spontaneity,
with which we determine ourselves; and in contingency, that is to say in the exclusion of metaphysical or logical necessity. Intelligence is like the soul of freedom
and what remains is like the body or the foundation. (T 288)

Leibniz and Suárez agree that intelligence, spontaneity, and contingency are
severally necessary and jointly sufﬁcient conditions of human freedom, but they
disagree about how these conditions are interrelated and how they are to be
explicated.
According to Suárez, it is because intelligent beings have wills and may determine themselves—in virtue of the fact that they are spontaneous, in the terminology of the Theodicy—that their actions are contingent and not naturally
necessitated. Because the Leibnizian will has no self-determining power, and is not
spontaneous in Suárez’s sense, Leibniz cannot account for contingency by appeal
to the will, and so the will must have a much less central place in Leibniz’s
account of freedom than it does in that of Suárez.
Leibniz and Suárez consequently characterize human freedom in quite different terms. According to Suárez, the will is the ‘‘form’’ of freedom, while Leibniz
terms intelligence, or reason, the ‘‘soul’’ of human freedom. Insofar as Suárez, like
other Scholastics, believed that the soul was the form of a thing, Leibniz’s terminology could be taken to imply that he takes intelligence to be the form of
human freedom. In other words, the implication is that intelligence plays the
fundamental role in Leibniz’s account of freedom that Suárez assigns to the will.
But is there any role for the will in Leibniz’s account of freedom? In order to
answer this question, we need to consider Leibniz’s conception of spontaneity.
According to Leibniz, a substance is spontaneous and may be said to determine
itself just in case its states are not determined from without, and in Leibniz’s
metaphysics, all substances are self-determining in this sense, because their states
are determined by an internal principle of action. Leibniz explains:
[E]ach simple substance naturally has perceptions, and its individuality consists in
the perpetual law that determines the succession of perceptions that are assigned
to it, and which arise naturally from one another. . . . Thus it follows that the soul

Leibniz Against Molinism

227

has thus in itself a perfect spontaneity, insofar as it only depends upon God and
itself in its actions. (T 291)

The internal principle of action that accounts for the spontaneity of substances is
represented as the will in conscious substances, so it does after all seem that there is
a role for the will in Leibniz’s conception of freedom, although just not the role
attributed to the will by the Molinists.
But this sort of spontaneity cannot contribute in any meaningful way to Leibnizian freedom.19 This spontaneity is common to all substances—animals and
human beings—so it does not explain freedom, which is the prerogative of intelligent beings. In this context, Leibniz’s clariﬁcatory remark about spontaneity in the
Theodicy is telling: ‘‘a perfect spontaneity is common to both us and animals, and in
the intelligent or free substance it becomes control over one’s actions’’ (T 291; see
DM 32; Grua 362). Spontaneity and the will (as the representation of the internal
principle that accounts for spontaneity) do not after all play a role in Leibniz’s
account of freedom; it is only because human beings are intelligent that they are
responsible for their choices and may be said to determine themselves. Leibniz’s
conception of the mind thus leads him to locate freedom in intelligence alone.20
In the New Essays, Leibniz redeﬁnes the problem of freedom in terms that do
not make any functional appeal to the will. Leibniz distinguishes two senses in
which one may speak of freedom.
One is when one opposes it to the imperfection or slavery of the mind, which is a
compulsion or constraint . . . like that which comes from the passions; the other
sense is to be found when one opposes freedom and necessity. Employing the ﬁrst
sense the Stoics said that only the wise person is free. . . . It is in this way that God
alone is perfectly free, and that created minds are free only to the extent that they
are above passion; and this kind of freedom pertains strictly to our understanding.
But the freedom of mind that is opposed to necessity concerns the bare will. . . . This
is what is called free choice [le franc arbitre]; it consists in the view that strongest
reasons or impressions that the understanding presents to the will . . . do not confer
upon it an absolute or (so to speak) metaphysical necessity. (A 6.6:175)

The ﬁrst sense of freedom, freedom of understanding, consists in rationality. According to Leibniz, substances may be more or less free in virtue of the extent to
which their actions reﬂect ‘‘clear and distinct’’ instead of ‘‘confused and obscure’’
perceptions, intellectual perceptions rather than passions. The second sense of
freedom—contingency—is what Leibniz believes that philosophers have been traditionally concerned with in discussions of freedom of the will, and is what Suárez
sought to preserve by appeal to the self-determining power of the will. Although
Leibniz does employ the term ‘will’ in his formulation of this second sense of
freedom, his use of it carries no more ontological commitment than contemporary
references to the will or volitions in discussions of freedom, for Leibniz makes no
functional appeal to the will in his account of contingency. According to Leibniz,
contingency simply consists in the absence of metaphysical necessity: that is, in the
fact that an agent’s choices are not themselves metaphysically necessary.21
To my mind, freedom of the understanding is at the heart of Leibniz’s conception of freedom. The minimal absence of metaphysical or logical necessity

228 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

required for contingency certainly does not sufﬁce by itself to capture the nature of
freedom, especially given the fact that Leibniz believed that all natural events,
including the movements of physical objects, are contingent in this sense (A
6.6:176). By contrast, it is in virtue of having intellects that substances are capable
of freedom at all, and the centrality of freedom of understanding mirrors Leibniz’s
later formulation that intelligence is the ‘‘soul’’ of human freedom.
This account of freedom, however, opens Leibniz to the objection that his
account of freedom does not yield any genuine freedom. After all, Leibniz’s conception of the mind seems to rob human beings of the power to initiate their own
actions, and his metaphysical reduction of choices to the sum of various tendencies
in the mind seems to transform the mind into a mechanism. Kant gave perhaps the
most famous formulation of this objection, remarking that Leibniz’s account of
freedom yields nothing more than ‘‘the freedom of a turnspit, which when once
wound up also carries out its motions of itself’’ (Ak 5:97). In a similar Kantian vein,
J. B. Schneewind maintains that Leibniz’s account of free will ‘‘still leaves us with
questions about freedom and the understanding of ourselves as agents rather than
as mere loci of more or less confused perceptions’’ (Schneewind 1998: 242). Suárez
would probably have objected to Leibniz’s conception of freedom along similar
lines.
I believe that Leibniz should not have been much troubled by this line
of objection. The Kantian criticism is motivated by the conviction that freedom
requires active self-determination by the will in order to explain why human
beings may merit reward or punishment for their actions. Suárez, too, is concerned with such issues. He notes that ‘‘everyone believes that those who act
badly deserve punishment by the very fact that acting in such a way has been
placed within their own power and will’’ (MD 19.2.16). But Leibniz does not posit
such a close connection between freedom and reward and punishment. In the
Theodicy, Leibniz even ﬂirts with a quasi-utilitarian justiﬁcation of reward and
punishment, which he claims could be justiﬁed even if all human actions were
metaphysically necessitated (T 67–75).22 To my mind, one way of understanding this ﬂirtation is as an attempt on Leibniz’s part to distinguish issues of reward
and punishment (questions having to do with ethics and justice) from issues of
freedom.
In making this distinction, Leibniz separates himself from a deep-rooted tradition that conceives of freedom in terms of accountability—in terms of whether
an agent is justiﬁed in being rewarded or punished for her actions—a tradition to
which both Kant and Suárez belong. Leibniz may be seen instead as beginning to
articulate a conception of freedom as attributability, according to which freedom
simply consists in an agent’s capacity for rational self-government.23 The difference
between these two conceptions of freedom is that freedom as accountability conceives of freedom as bound up with active self-determination, and therefore is
quite congenial to a conception of the will, whereas freedom as attributability
conceives of self-determination as rational determination rather than as an exercise
of active power. Because freedom as attributability does not require the real use of
the will, there is as it were a preestablished harmony between Leibniz’s conception
of freedom and his conception of the mind.

Leibniz Against Molinism 229

Closing
I have argued that Leibniz’s objections to Molinist freedom reﬂect his conception
of the nature of the mind, and suggested that consideration of Leibniz’s conception
of the mind helps illuminate what is distinctive about his conception of freedom.
Leibniz breaks with the Scholastic tradition in reconﬁguring the nature of the will
and its place in accounts of freedom, and attention to Leibniz’s response to this
tradition clariﬁes the nature of his break from it.
I believe that further consideration of the role of the mind (and will) in early
modern accounts of freedom will illuminate what is distinctive about those
accounts. Today it is commonly believed that early modern philosophers transformed the problem of freedom by embarking on a line of enquiry that leads to the
modern problem of free will framed in terms of a tension between determinism
and human freedom.24 This received view obscures aspects of early modern approaches to the problem of freedom that do not cohere easily with our own
contemporary conception of that problem. Historicizing the problem of freedom
by tracking the evolution of particular concepts—such as the will—central to early
modern formulations of the problem will combat such myopia and enable us to
achieve a deeper, more contextually situated understanding of the early modern
problem of freedom.
A richer historical understanding of the early modern problem of freedom may
also help us better to understand our own problem of freedom. By coming to
understand the nature and source of the problems that drove early modern discussions of freedom and the conceptual resources drawn upon in these discussions,
we may come better to appreciate the nature of the problem space that structures
contemporary approaches to freedom, as we come to see the differences between
our problem of freedom and the early modern problem. In this way a more historically sensitive approach to the problem of freedom in early modern philosophy
may well yield a deeper philosophical understanding of the problem of freedom,
both in its early modern and contemporary manifestations.

Notes
An earlier version of this essay was presented at the 2001 New England Seminar in Early Modern
Philosophy: thanks to the members of the audience for their discussion. Thanks also to Nate Bowditch,
Paul Lodge, Matt McAdam, J. B. Schneewind, Alison Simmons, Kurt Smith, Carol Voeller, and
the editors of this book, Jan Cover and Don Rutherford, for helpful comments and suggestions. I would
like to register a special debt to Bob Sleigh, without whose encouragement and support I would never
have written on Leibniz.
1. Both contemporary philosophers and historians of early modern philosophy tend to see the problem
in this way. For example, in the introduction to an anthology of contemporary articles on free will, Gary
Watson explains that ‘‘free will is problematic for many philosophers because of its controversial relation to
determinism’’ (Watson 1982: 2). Although the recent survey of early modern approaches to this topic, Sleigh,
Chappell, and Della Rocca (1998), is part of the section of The Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century
Philosophy entitled ‘‘Will, Action, and Moral Philosophy,’’ the article’s focus is reﬂected in its title: ‘‘Determinism and Human Freedom.’’ There is relatively little attention to the will in the body of the article.

230 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
2. Alexander (1898) treats the concept of the will from the Pre-Socratics to Lotze; he undertakes
relatively little in-depth analysis, but nevertheless provides a good general overview of the terrain.
Bourke 1964 outlines but does not work out in detail the nature of changes in conceptions of the will.
Bourke remarks that ‘‘one way of making this investigation would be to write a history of philosophy,
taking will and volition as a central interest, and treating the various thinkers in schools or in chronological order. I must confess that this is what I had in mind originally. . . . In effect, I have assembled
such a chronological account, in preliminary research notes, and it is a welter of materials which
requires further organization’’ (8). Bourke’s ‘‘preliminary research notes’’ are at times illuminating, but
his account is essentially a catalogue of the various meanings that the term ‘will’ has had over the years.
Arendt 1978 considers the implications of different accounts of the will for conceptions of freedom, with
special attention to Augustine, Aquinas, Scotus, Nietzsche, and Kant. Although Arendt’s observations
are brilliant, her focus is not particularly historical, and her investigation is structured by the aim of
clearing space for a phenomenology of political action.
3. Murray 1996 also advocates examining Leibniz’s account of freedom from the ‘‘axis of faculty
psychology’’—by considering the role that the intellect and the will play in Leibniz’s account of
freedom—although he comes to quite different conclusions on the basis of this investigation.
4. In particular, it was devised to provide an interpretation of session 6, canon 4, of the Council of
Trent: ‘‘If someone were to say that man’s free decision [liberum arbitrium] moved and excited by God,
by assenting to God’s call and excitement, in no way cooperates towards disposing and preparing itself in
order to obtain the grace of justiﬁcation and that it cannot dissent, if it wants [neque posse dissentire, si
velit], but that like something inanimate it does nothing whatever and is merely passive, let him be
anathema.’’ For Molina’s account of freedom, see Molina 1953: 1.2.3.
5. See Pufendorf 1934: bk. 1, chap. 4; Bramhall, A Vindication of Liberty (in Hobbes and Bramhall
1999); Clarke 1998.
6. In ‘‘Of Liberty and Necessity’’ Hobbes addresses the Molinist deﬁnition of freedom: ‘‘I hold that
the ordinary deﬁnition of a free agent [the Molinist deﬁnition], namely that a free agent is that which,
when all things are present which are needful to produce the effect, can nevertheless not produce it,
implies a contradiction and is nonsense; being as much as to say that the cause may be sufﬁcient, that is
necessary, and yet the effect shall not follow’’ (Hobbes and Bramhall 1999: 39). Cudworth claims that ‘‘if
the . . . will do not necessarily follow the last dictate of practical judgement of the necessary understanding, but still remains indifferent and doth fortuitously determine itself either in compliance with
the same or otherwise, then will liberty of will be mere irrationality, and madness itself acting or determining all human actions’’ (1996: 169). Locke charges that ‘‘a perfect Indifferency in the Mind, not
determinable by its last judgment of Good and Evil, that is thought to attend Choice, would be so far from
being an advantage and excellency of any intellectual Nature, that it would be as great an imperfection, as
the want of Indifferency to act, or not to act, till determined by the Will, would be an imperfection on the
other side’’ (Essay 2.21.48). Locke later adds, in words reminiscent of Cudworth: ‘‘Is it worth the Name of
Freedom to be at liberty to play the Fool, and draw Shame and Misery upon a Man’s self? If to break loose
from the conduct of Reason, and to want that restraint of Examination and Judgment, which keeps us from
chusing or doing the worse, be Liberty, true liberty, mad Men and fools are the only Freemen: But yet,
I think, no Body would chuse to be mad for the sake of such Liberty, but he that is mad already’’ (Essay
2.21.50).
7. I take Suárez rather than Molina as my starting point here because Suárez’s account of freedom
is subtler and more detailed than Molina’s account, although it does follow the framework laid down by
Molina. Moreover, Leibniz may well have known Suárez’s work better than Molina’s. Although he does
refer to Molina in the Theodicy, those references may be derived as much from the text of Pierre Bayle
to which he was responding as from his own reading. Leibniz was certainly acquainted with Suárez’s
work: his master’s thesis on the principle of individuation was largely a response to Suárez’s discussion of
that topic. In the New Essays, he pays Suárez the following compliment: ‘‘But to be fair to the deeper
Scholastics, such as Suárez . . . it should be acknowledged that their works sometimes contain substantial
discussions—for instance of the continuum, of the inﬁnite, of contingency, of the reality of what is
abstract, of the principle of individuation, of the origin of forms and a vacuum among forms, of the soul
and its faculties, of God’s communion with created things, etc., and even, in moral philosophy, of the
nature of the will and the principles of justice. In short, it must be admitted that there is still gold in that

Leibniz Against Molinism

231

dross’’ (A 6.6:431; emphasis added). Leibniz himself thought Suárez’s work deserved to be taken seriously, and this provides another prima facie reason for considering it in this context. Nevertheless, I do
not mean to attribute to Leibniz a deep or detailed understanding of the Metaphysical Disputations. In
this respect, it is worth bearing in mind Sleigh’s cautionary remark about the relation between early
modern philosophers and their predecessors: ‘‘It is entirely salutory that historians of early modern
philosophy are paying increasing heed to the late mediaeval and Renaissance background of their
subject. But it is important to take into account exactly what the philosopher under investigation knew
of that background. It is worth remembering that we are not studying historians of philosophy; for the
most part we are studying philosophers, whose familiarity with the texts of those whose names they
bandied about may be surprisingly meagre’’ (Sleigh et al. 1998: 1275, n. 170). In what follows, I present
only as much of Suárez’s account of human freedom as is necessary to focus the target of Leibniz’s
criticisms of Molinism.
8. J. B. Schneewind recognizes this point, remarking that ‘‘Leibniz does not call upon a separate
faculty of the will in order to account for freedom of choice’’ (1998: 243). Yet Schneewind does not, to
my mind at least, explain clearly why Leibniz does not call upon a faculty of the will in order to explain
freedom, or consider the implications of his explanation.
9. Murray 1996: 32–36 similarly surveys Suárez’s account of freedom.
10. It might be objected that these deﬁnitions do not adequately distinguish free causes from
natural causes, because free causes, like natural causes, also may only act if ‘‘all the requisites for acting
are in place,’’ with the difference consisting in the fact that one of the requisites of the action of the free
cause is the agent’s choice. However, this is a misunderstanding. The ‘‘requisites for action’’ in question
here should be understood to be external or antecedent conditions for action, conditions that apply both
to natural and free causes. Suárez’s point is that these antecedent conditions do not determine an agent
to act in the way that they determine a natural cause to act. Suárez explains: ‘‘when it is said that what is
free is such that it is able to act and able not to act, given that all things required for acting having been
posited, this should be understood as referring to the things that are required antecedently, and not to
the others. . . . This very point is suggested . . . when it is claimed that a free faculty must be disposed and
proximately prepared for its work in such a way that, given that disposition, it is able to act or not to act.
For the preparation in question requires all those things that are required in the ﬁrst act for operating’’
(MD 19.4.10). Leibniz himself seems not to recognize this point, and in fact raises an objection to
Molinist freedom akin to the one considered in this note. I return to this point in the third section.
11. In A Treatise of Freewill, Ralph Cudworth makes a similar criticism, noting that ‘‘as for this
scholastic deﬁnition of freewill, viz. that it is, after all things put [a variant translation of ‘with all things
having been posited’ (omnis requisitis positis) in the Molinist deﬁnition], besides the volition itself, an
indifferency of not doing or of doing this or that. This is an upstart thing, which the ancient peripatetics,
as Alexander and others, were unacquainted with’’ (1996: 170). Both Leibniz and Cudworth were quite
historically sensitive philosophers, so it is not surprising that they would both note that the Molinist
deﬁnition of freedom was somewhat of an innovation in historical terms. One aspect of Cudworth’s
criticism is worth remarking, because it differs from that of Leibniz. Leibniz tends to focus his criticisms
of Molinism on the notion of freedom of exercise, which I suggested in the second section was central to
the Molinist conception of freedom. In the quoted passage, however, Cudworth conﬂates freedom of
exercise—the freedom to will or not to will some act—with freedom of speciﬁcation, the freedom to will
this or to will that object, to specify the object of one’s will. Although Suárez takes freedom of exercise
and freedom of speciﬁcation to be related, he is careful to distinguish them (MD 19.5.18).
12. The charge that the Molinist free agent is like Buridan’s ass is a later formulation of Leibniz’s
basic criticism of Molinism that derives from Leibniz’s encounter with Bayle’s article on Buridan in the
Dictionnaire Historique et Critique. See G 3:402.
13. Hobbes also raised an objection akin to that of Leibniz against his Molinist opponent,
Bramhall, who responded to Hobbes in words reminiscent of Suárez. See Hobbes and Bramhall 1999:
38, 62.
14. Relatively little scholarly attention has been paid to Leibniz’s conception of appetition: one of
the few exceptions is Kulstad 1990. To some extent, this is due to the fact that Leibniz himself does not
devote the attention to appetition that he does to perception.
15. Rutherford 1995b: 138 similarly points out that the distinction is merely ‘‘conceptual.’’

232 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
16. Thanks to Don Rutherford for drawing my attention to this passage. See also Leibniz’s response to Bayle at G 4:562, cited in Rutherford 1995b: 138–139.
17. ‘‘Spontaneity and Freedom in Leibniz,’’ this volume.
18. Ezio Vailati has noted this line of argument as well. His remarks, which arise in the course of
his dicussion of Leibniz’s criticisms of Clarke’s conception of freedom, are worth quoting at some
length. According to Vailati’s Leibniz, ‘‘acceptance of liberty of indifference ultimately destroys the very
possibility of a science of the mind. . . . The point can be expanded by considering Leibniz’s critique of
the notion of ’mere will’ which Clarke uses to explain choice in a state of equilibrium. Leibniz claimed
that in addition to being unworthy of God, a mere will could not exist, since its notion is incompatible
with the deﬁnition of will. . . . Leibniz did not elaborate, but presumably what he had in mind was the
sort of deﬁnition of volition that one can see in the New Essays: ‘volition is the effort or endeavour
(conatus) towards what one ﬁnds good and away from what one ﬁnds bad, the endeavour arising
immediately out of one’s awareness of things’ [NE 2.21.5]. . . . Ultimately, if one takes the view that
science deals with laws, as Leibniz saw, Clarke’s view leads to the conclusion that no science of volition,
and hence of human action, can be given’’ (Vailati 1997: 95–96). I think that Vailati’s reading mislocates
Leibniz’s objection to the Molinist account of freedom. Leibniz does not generally think of the natural
world—the mind or the body—in terms of laws, but rather in terms of natures. (See Jolley, ‘‘Leibniz and
Occasionalism,’’ this volume, for a consideration of the implications of this strand of Leibniz’s philosophy in the context of his debate with Malebranche.) Leibniz’s criticism of the Molinists turns on the
idea that the nature of the Leibnizian mind does not leave any room for the Molinist will. The Molinist
conception of the will undermines the possibility of a science of the mind because it postulates a faculty
that does not ﬁt within the (Leibnizian) mind.
19. Here I agree with Murray, ‘‘Spontaneity and Freedom in Leibniz’’ (this volume), although we
understand the implications of this point very differently.
20. Commentators have begun to highlight the importance of intelligence to Leibniz’s conception
of human freedom. See, among others, Phemister 1991 and Davidson 1998.
21. This claim will certainly strike some readers as controversial; it deserves more discussion in
another context. I will brieﬂy give my reasons for this claim. Throughout Leibniz’s philosophical career,
from the Confessio Philosophi to the Discourse on Metaphysics to the Theodicy (A 6.3:1293; DM 4;
G 6:31–32, 37/H 55–57, 61), Leibniz was concerned to show the fallaciousness of fatalism, which he
believed had disastrous consequences for morality and religion. Leibniz believed that fatalism rested on
‘‘confused notions that had been formed concerning freedom, necessity, and destiny’’ (G 6:29/H 53).
The confusion that led to fatalism was the belief that all actions were metaphysically necessitated, and
therefore Leibniz sought to articulate a clearer notion of necessity that would help to turn back the
threat of fatalism and restore faith in morality and religion. Consequently, it seems to me that throughout his work Leibniz is most concerned to show how his system could avoid the metaphysical necessity
that he took to be a great threat to human freedom.
22. In this stretch of text Leibniz does admit that there might not be any justiﬁcation for retributive
punishment in a world in which human actions were determined by metaphysical necessity (T 73).
Some readers might therefore take Leibniz to agree with Kant and Suárez here about the nature of the
freedom required for genuine moral responsibility. However, Leibniz elsewhere suggests that he was not
particularly interested in justifying retributive punishment. For example, Leibniz remarks that ‘‘judges
do not seek the reasons which have disposed a man to have a bad will, but only stop to consider the
extent to which this particular will is bad’’ (DM 30; see T 264). Moreover, I believe that even the kind of
retributive punishment that Leibniz believed may have been appropriate did not require the kind of selfdetermination required by Kant or Suárez. According to Leibniz, the only threat to retributive punishment is metaphysical necessity, and in order to turn back the threat of metaphysical necessity Leibniz
does not need an account of freedom along the lines of that of Kant or Suárez.
23. This terminology is derived from Watson 1996: 228–229.
24. Don Garrett gives especially clear expression to this widely held view: ‘‘The Scientiﬁc Revolution demanded a rethinking of the relation between human beings and nature. The success of
mechanistic explanation led to conceptions of the causal relation that take events, rather than substances, as the most fundamental relata. . . . Event-centered conceptions of causation led, in turn, to
more precise formulations of the doctrine of causal determinism within natural science, while the

Leibniz Against Molinism

233

explanatory successes of natural science inevitably raised questions about the applicability of its methods
to human affairs. As a result, philosophers were forced to address anew the relation between natural
events and human actions, the nature of human responsibility for actions, and the justice of divine
rewards and punishments in a world of causal determination’’ (Garrett 1997: 118). Schneewind 1998 has
already mounted a sharp challenge to a central assumption that Garrett makes in this passage—the
assumption that natural science drove philosophical enquiry in the early modern period, including
enquiry into ethics. I believe that investigation into the place of conceptions of the mind and will in
early modern accounts of freedom may lead us further to rethink the traditional conception of the early
modern problem of freedom to which Garrett gives voice.

12

Video Meliora Proboque,
Deteriora Sequor
Leibniz on the Intellectual
Source of Sin
J A C K D. D A V I D S O N

eciding to help Jason, thereby betraying her father and his kingdom, Ovid’s

D Medea says: ‘‘Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor’’—I see the better

way and approve it, but I follow the worse way.1 Leibniz knew this quotation
well; it appears, for example, in the very early Confessio Philosophi (1672/3) and
thirty-seven years later in the Theodicy (1710). Ovid’s Medea’s violence is not
explained by the fact that she is a barbarian witch; rather, her lament is moving
precisely because it poetically expresses our common experience of knowing the
wrong action is wrong, and doing it anyway (or knowing the right action, and
failing to do it). Such experience seems presupposed by Saint Paul when he
writes: ‘‘For what I want to do I do not do, but what I hate to do I do’’ (Romans
7:15). Socrates, as represented by Plato and Aristotle, denied this natural view,
maintaining instead that no one ever knowingly does wrong.2 Let us call views
like Socrates’, that no one ever willingly does wrong, intellectualism; according to
the intellectualist, all volitional error is preceded by cognitive error. For the
intellectualist, knowledge is sufﬁcient for virtue, and so supports the following
implication: for any goods x and y, we cannot both believe that x is better than y,
and choose y. According to this view, akrasia, or weak-willed behavior, is conceptually impossible.
The denial of intellectualism, anti-intellectualism, denies that knowledge is
sufﬁcient for virtue, and so supports the following implication: for any goods x and
y, we can both believe that x is better than y, and do y. Anti-intellectualism did not
wait long for a champion. Finding Socrates’ model of soul too simplistic to account for what he took to be obvious cases of psychological conﬂict, Plato presents
the story of Leontius, who, walking outside the city walls, encounters some corpses
lying in the execution ﬁeld:
234

The Intellectual Source of Sin

235

He had an appetite to look at them but at the same time he was disgusted and
turned away. For a time he struggled with himself and covered his face, but,
ﬁnally, overpowered by the appetite, he pushed his eyes wide open and rushed
toward the corpses, saying ‘‘Look for yourselves, you evil wretches, take your ﬁll of
the beautiful sight.’’ (Republic 439e–440)3

Unlike Socrates, Plato acknowledges akratic behavior, and uses it as evidence for
his tripartite model of the soul.
This essay examines Leibniz’s account of why we sin, concentrating in particular on the question of intellectualism. His views on practical reason and its
occasional breakdown are fascinating in their own right, offering an explanation of
a phenomenon many of us ﬁnd both existentially and theoretically vexing.

The Seventeenth-Century Background
For the medievals and for most early modern philosophers, choice was understood
as the result of two faculties, the intellect and the will. The proper end of the
intellect was truth, its role to assess the value of the choices available to an agent.
The proper end of the will was the good, its role to incline and choose that possibility judged best by the intellect. Seventeenth-century philosophers disagreed,
however, over the precise relation between the intellect and will. The nature of this
relation was among the central issues at the heart of the intramural and extramural
disagreements between Jesuits and Dominicans, and among the Lutheran, Reformed, and Remonstrant (or Arminian) confessions.
Those who gave priority to the will often claimed that an action is free only
when the will is indifferent. Philip van Limborch, the head professor of the Remonstrant seminary in Amsterdam and a staunch defender of the Arminian understanding of freedom, wrote to John Locke that indifference, the sine qua non of
freedom, ‘‘is that energy of spirit by which, when all requisites for acting are
present, it can act or not act’’ (Locke 1982: vol. 7, 367).4 Included in the present
requisites are God’s general concurrence and the judgment of the intellect. According to the Jesuits and Remonstrants, an agent need not will or choose that
which is judged best by his intellect. According to van Limborch, ‘‘the will is the
master of our actions, and governs them according to its choice’’ (Locke 1982: vol.
7, 368). According to this libertarian version of anti-intellectualism, freedom rests
in an undetermined act of the will, independent of the intellect’s evaluation and
determination. Call this view voluntarism. In his Loci communes the inﬂuential
Lutheran theologian Philip Melanchthon gives his version of the view:
Knowledge serves the will (voluntas), and thus one calls the will . . . joined with the
knowledge or with the understanding of the intellect by a new name, ‘free will’
(arbitrium). For the will . . . in man corresponds to the place of a despot in a
republic. Just as the senate is subject to the despot, so is knowledge to the
will . . . with the consequence that although knowledge gives good warning, yet
the will . . . casts knowledge out and is borne along by its own affection. . . . Freedom
cannot rightly be said to belong to the knowing part; rather it is subject to the
will . . . and is driven hither and yon. (Melanchthon 1969: 23–24)

236 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

Advocates of voluntarism acknowledge what many would call an obvious fact of
our lives—that we often (or at least sometimes) do wrong knowingly—whereas
intellectualism must explain it away. Second, advocates claim voluntarism makes
us properly responsible for our sins, which in turn makes divine judgment just and
morality itself possible. By contrast, intellectualism entails, in the words of William
Molyneux, ‘‘that a Man shall be Damn’d, because he understands no better than
he does’’ (Locke 1982: vol. 4, 601). Third, proponents of voluntarism argue that any
other view violates orthodox teaching on soteriology. Scripture writes that God loves
the whole world (1 John 3:16, 1 John 2:2). Voluntarists understand this to mean that
those not elected freely reject God, not that the damned are lost through a failure
to understand. For Christian philosophers concerned with exonerating God from
various versions of the problem of evil, voluntarism of a libertarian stripe is an
important component of the powerful free will theodicy or defense of God’s justice.
Just as those who give primacy to the will claim that an action is free only when
the will is indifferent, so those who give primacy to the intellect claim that an action
is free only when it is rational. We ﬁnd this view in Francis Turretin, the most
important Reformed theologian of the second half of the seventeenth century and
an eloquent advocate of intellectualism. In his inﬂuential Institutio Theologicae
Elencticae he writes that the rational agent ‘‘cannot be rational without on that very
account being free; nor can he be deprived of liberty without being despoiled of
reason’’ (Turretin 1992: t. 10, q. 3, a. 11).5 Since the will is created by God to be ‘‘a
rational appetite,’’ it must follow ‘‘the last judgment of the practical intellect’’ (t. 10,
q. 2, a. 7), otherwise we would be seeking our own misery, which is absurd (t. 10, q.
13, a. 8). This entails that ‘‘every sin arises from ignorance since the will cannot seek
evil as evil, but [only] under the idea of good’’ (t. 9, q. 13, a. 5). Turretin says that
Medea’s famous lament is true only if read as reﬂecting a judgment preceding ‘‘the
last judgment,’’ for the latter ‘‘can never oppose the decided and last judgment’’
(t. 10, q. 2, a. 15). Sin is ‘‘error in the mind’’ (t. 9, q. 13, a. 5).
Turretin also illustrates the natural afﬁnity between intellectualism and
compatibilism, the latter being the view that cognitive and volitional systems can
be determined and yet free. Rejecting the Molinist deﬁnition of freedom embraced
by the Arminians (and present-day libertarians), Turretin proposed instead: ‘‘[I]t
sufﬁces [for freedom] that there be spontaneity and willingness depending upon
a judgment of the reason’’ (t. 10, q. 3, a. 15; emphasis added). Far from destroying
freedom, the determination of the will by the intellect ‘‘makes it perfect’’ (t. 10, q. 4,
a. 12). Since indifference is not to be found in God who is ‘‘good most freely . . . but
necessarily and immutably’’ (t. 10, q. 3, a. 5) and since the essence of freedom must
be the same on earth as in heaven, ‘‘the Jesuits, the Socinians and Remonstrants’’
are in deadly error in their efforts to ‘‘bring back (either openly or secretly and by
burrowing) Pelagianism and semi-Pelagianism and to place the idol of free will in
the citadel’’ (t. 10, q. 1, a. 1).
Advocates of intellectualism can interpret the biblical teaching that we are
made in God’s image in a robust and straightforward fashion, for just as God’s will
invariably follows the judgments of his intellect, so do ours. Second, the Christian
intellectualist has an account of freedom that makes God the most free being,
not, as libertarianism entails, the least free being. (For if God is essentially

The Intellectual Source of Sin

237

omniscient and morally perfect, there is no possibility for undetermined action of
the sort the libertarian requires for freedom.) Third, intellectualism is attractive to
theologians who stress the necessity of God’s grace against the Pelagian heresy. In
Turretin’s austere words:
It is of great importance, therefore, that the disciples of true and genuine grace
should oppose themselves strenuously to these deadly errors and so build up the
misery of man and the necessity of grace that the entire cause of destruction
should be ascribed to man and the whole glory of salvation to God alone. (1992:
t. 10, q. 1, a. 1)

Locating Leibniz
Even a cursory examination of texts throughout Leibniz’s career shows that he
takes the intellectualist side in this ancient debate. In the early (1672/3) Confessio Philosophi, an imaginary dialogue between a philosopher and a theologian,
Leibniz takes up Medea’s words. The philosopher—Leibniz’s spokesperson—ﬁrst
cautions that the famous words, if not properly understood, are absurd. His gloss is
that Medea did realize the injustice of the deed, but that the pleasure of revenge
appeared to her a greater good ‘‘than the deed was evil’’ (A 6.3:134). The philosopher concludes:
Therefore, from this one will not be able to prove that sometimes something is
chosen which, in the opinion of the chooser, is worse, all things considered. Who
believes the opposite, subverts all the principles of morality, and cannot even say
what willing is. (A 6.3:135)6

Liberty ‘‘consists in the use of reason,’’ which is the ‘‘true root of liberty’’ (A
6.3:135). After rejecting the Molinist conception of freedom, the philosopher adds:
If those passions are absent it is as impossible for us to err in thinking, to sin in
willing, as it is for an attentive mind, with eyes open, not deprived by some fault,
not to see, in a medium adequately lighted, a colored object in its proper distance
and magnitude. (A 6.3:135)

To which, the theologian replies, ‘‘So all sin arises from ignorance,’’ and the philosopher agrees.
Roughly ten years later (in the early 1680s) in some notes on Bellarmine,
Leibniz writes: ‘‘It seems this can be said: it is certain and infallible that the mind
determines itself to what appears to be the greatest good. No contrary example can
be given where error would not have preceded sin’’ (Grua 298).7 Through the
1680s Leibniz is a card-carrying intellectualist.
Leibniz retains his criticism of voluntarism and its elevation of the will’s power
in his writings from the 1690s and beyond. In his ‘‘Comments’’ on Descartes’
Principles from 1692, Leibniz remarks on Descartes’ reply to the epistemological
problem of evil. Of Descartes’ unyoking of the will from the scope of reason’s
evaluation, Leibniz writes: ‘‘I do not admit that errors are more dependent upon the
will than on the intellect. . . . The source of all errors is precisely the same in its own

238 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

way as the reason for errors which is observed in arithmetical calculation’’ (G 4:361/
L 387–388). The Theodicy discussion of Ovid’s Medea appears to mirror that of the
Confessio:
But free will tends toward good, and if it meets with evil it is by accident, for the
reason that this evil is concealed beneath the good and masked, as it were. These
words which Ovid ascribes to Medea, Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor,
imply that the morally good is mastered by the agreeably good which makes more
impression on souls when they are disturbed by the passions. (T 154/H 220)8

Since unlike the notorious ‘‘Private Miracle’’ passage from De Necessitate et
Contingentia (C19/MP 100–101), the main points made in the foregoing texts are
repeated throughout Leibniz’s career in a variety of passages, this brief diachronic
survey suggests Leibniz subscribes to intellectualism into and throughout his
mature philosophy.9 This ascription locates Leibniz on one side of a rough taxonomy, but many of the most important details of his philosophical psychology
remain unexplored. Is the intellect prior to the will (to put the question in Thomistic terms)? Must the will be a rational appetite? If Leibniz answers afﬁrmatively,
does the will do any real work, or is it merely a vestigial remnant of a Scholastic
theory retained for the appearance of orthodoxy? If all sin is the result of ignorance,
how are we culpable? Can the passions unseat reason, or does passion achieve its
disruption only indirectly? Since it certainly seems to be an all too familiar fact that
we sometimes act contrary to what we know to be right, what motivates Leibniz to
adapt and defend so implausible a theory?

Leibniz’s Moral Psychology
Since Leibniz’s psychology supervenes, at least in his mature philosophy, on his
theory of monads, and since some of the same terms do double duty, it is with the
latter that I begin. Spirits or rational minds are those monads, Leibniz’s term for
basic substances, that are distinguished from the souls of nonhuman animals by
being self-conscious and capable of knowing eternal and necessary truths. Minds,
like all substances for Leibniz, are necessarily active. All minds act spontaneously,
that is, initial states aside, each state is caused by some preceding internal state, with
no intersubstantial causation between any created substances. Since bodies supervene on minds, all activity at the most fundamental metaphysical level is mental.
Each substance differs in all its intrinsic, nonrelational qualities. While monads are
ontologically simple, they are representationally complex.
Leibniz describes the basic activity of monads as a complex endeavor (conatus) or appetition, which distinguishes the soul’s state at any moment and is the
principle which drives it from one perception to another (Mon 15). Appetition is a
teleological endeavor by which a soul seeks a more perfect state. For spirits or
minds, this perfection is epistemological insofar as the soul seeks a more distinct
understanding of the universe (Mon 60), and moral insofar as the soul seeks the
good (PNG 3). This foundational theory of agency is extremely abstract and
metaphysical, and bears little resemblance to the phenomenology of our lives as

The Intellectual Source of Sin 239

embodied beings interacting in a natural and social world. Leibniz frames his
more detailed account of mental activity in terms of scholastic faculty psychology
familiar to all and accepted by many of his early modern audience.
Leibniz ‘‘psychologizes’’ his spare, metaphysical account of monadic activity by
adopting the language and general framework of Thomas’s theory of human action.
In this model, primacy is given the faculties of will and intellect. Each is understood
teleologically and so has its proper object: the end of the will is the good, the end of
the intellect is the true. Freedom depends on the proper functioning of each.
According to Thomas, reason’s work is prior since it must ﬁrst apprehend the good
as true, ‘‘for the will cannot desire a good that is not previously apprehended by
reason’’ (ST 1a2ae, q. 19, a. 13). In his comments on Aristotle’s discussion of akrasia,
Thomas writes:
[T]he opinion of Socrates was that knowledge can never be overcome by passion.
Therefore he held every virtue to be a kind of knowledge, and every sin a kind of
ignorance. In this he was somewhat right, because, since the object of the will is a
good or an apparent good, it is never moved to an evil, unless that which is not
good appear good in some respect to the reason; so that will would never tend to
evil unless there were some ignorance or error in the reason. Hence it is written
(Prov. 14:22): They err that work evil. (ST 1a2ae, q. 77, a. 2)10

Leibniz agrees: ‘‘We can only will what we think good’’ (NE 2.212.21.19/RB 180). In
De veritate, Thomas writes that since ‘‘evil happens only because the evil is presented to it under the aspect of a good . . . evil is involuntary’’ (q. 24, a. 8). Leibniz
concurs, writing in his ‘‘Remarks’’ on King: ‘‘Errors are therefore, absolutely
speaking, never voluntary’’ (T k25/H 435). Both thinkers insist that the will can only
be moved by ends recognized as good by the intellect; from this it follows that
choosing evil as evil is conceptually impossible. Interpreting the ‘‘will as rational
appetite’’ doctrine robustly, as Thomas and Leibniz do, yields the truth of (some
form of ) intellectualism analytically. We have now pushed the original question—
why does Leibniz subscribe to intellectualism—back to the question: why does
Leibniz think that the will is a rational appetite? I think we can distinguish at least
three important Leibnizian motivations.
After chastising Descartes for taking refuge in mystery when confronted with
the conﬂict between God’s preordination and human freedom, Leibniz writes:
There should be no contradiction even in the mysteries of faith; much less so in
the mysteries of nature. So if we wish to stand out as philosophers, we must once
more take up the arguments. (G 4:363/L 389)

Philosophical theology raises some of the most difﬁcult questions in all of philosophy, and this is one reason Leibniz is drawn to it. The same can be said for
providing an account of human nature—Leibniz’s philosophical program is astonishingly ambitious—but Leibniz takes up the arguments, buoyed by his conﬁdence that ‘‘the foundations are everywhere the same’’ (NE 4.17.16/RB 490). Nor
is he willing to make his analysis easier by admitting mysteries; the workings of the
world and the human mind are ultimately explicable. This refusal to countenance
brute facts manifests itself in his psychology with the demand that cognitive and

240 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

volitional states and acts have sufﬁcient causes. Leibniz had several objections to
the indeterminism required by the Molinists and Arminians, but perhaps his
deepest criticism is that libertarianism posits a mystery at the very heart of the
theory of the self and its agency. (This is particularly damning since agency is at
the heart of Leibniz’s theory of substance.) The will requires a sufﬁcient cause;
since willing to will would lead to a vicious regress:
[W]e do not will because we will to will, but because our nature is to will what we
believe best. And this belief does not come from our will, but from the nature of
things, or the state of our mind. (A 6.4:1408)

Since the end or telos of freedom is to act in accordance with the good on the basis
of a distinct understanding of the true, it is ﬁtting and natural that the will is a
rational appetite.
This last point introduces the second reason Leibniz maintains that the will
tracks the intellect. Leibniz champions various conceptions of freedom in different
contexts. At the center of these related conceptions of agency is the kind of freedom enjoyed by God, the paradigm of freedom. God is free because he acts from
reasons in accordance with the genuine good. Leibniz sometimes calls this notion
the freedom of understanding. Freedom is a thoroughly teleological notion—its
value lies not in the (to Leibniz) impossible ability to choose, willy-nilly, anything
at all; it is a perfection because it is the capacity to choose, through reasons, what
we should choose. To be determined by the good is true freedom, ideal agency. As
Leibniz puts it in Du Franc Arbitre: ‘‘I say that freedom to will whatever we want
is an impossible thing . . . true freedom of the mind consists in recognizing and
choosing the best’’ (A 6.4:1408).
Leibniz believes that we have been created in the image of God, insofar as
ﬁniteness permits.11 A crucial aspect of the imitatio dei doctrine, as understood by
Leibniz, is that our wills act on the apparent good, just as God’s will acts on the
actual good. If the will does not pursue the best as perceived by the intellect, we
would not be beings that are rational by nature. To act against our perception of
the best would be a symptom of madness, not sanity and freedom.
The last reason Leibniz gives for maintaining that the will is a rational appetite is that denying this truth ‘‘subverts all the principles of morality’’ (A 6.3:135).
Leibniz’s point is that denying that the will tracks the representation of the good
renders our choices random by severing the connection between choice and our
reasons for actions. Such ‘‘liberty’’ would be blind and brutish, rendering ascriptions of moral responsibility pointless.
We have now seen Leibniz’s defense of his claim that the will is moved to
action by the intellect. What, however, does the will do? The will is that faculty of
the mind whereby some of its ideas are converted into actions. Appetition, the
source of any monadic change (Mon 15), is driven and rendered determinate
through perception by being an endeavor toward a speciﬁc end that is represented
as a true good (NE 2.21.36). Leibniz’s account of volition, however, must satisfy the
doctrine of spontaneity and do justice to our commonsense intuition that our
desires and intentions interact in complex ways with our environment. Commenting on these points in his ‘‘Remarks’’ on King, Leibniz writes:

The Intellectual Source of Sin 241
[E]ven though an active substance is determined only by itself, it does not follow
that it is not moved by objects: for it is the representation of the object within it
which contributes towards the determination. Now the representation does not
come from without, and consequently there is complete spontaneity. Objects do
not act upon intelligent substances as efﬁcient and physical causes, but as ﬁnal
and moral causes. (T k20/H 427)12

Leibniz gives different deﬁnitions of the will in different places, a generous
sample of which is contained in the papers and letters collected by Grua. In a work
entitled On the Elements of True Piety, or the Love of God for All (henceforth True
Piety), Leibniz writes:
The will is a judgment about good and bad. . . . Judgment is practical reason [or
thought], or reason with a striving to action. . . . If you substitute the deﬁnition of
‘judgment’ for the deﬁnition of ‘will,’ you will see that ‘Will is the thought of good
and bad, linked with a striving to action.’ This agrees with those who hold that the
will is the last stage of deliberation. (A 6.4:1360; emphasis in the original)

And in a text On Postulates, Leibniz writes:
The will is the striving of an intelligent being. Or the will is the judgment about
good and bad. . . . The two deﬁnitions coincide, because God formed the nature
[of humans] to be rational, with the striving of an action consequent on that
agent’s opinion of good and evil. (A 6.4:2820)

These deﬁnitions, both of which Grua dates speculatively from 1678 or 1679, are
quite striking. Traditionally, the will is restricted to the appetitive side of the mental
divide, with reason restricted to the side of the intellect. In True Piety and Postulates,
however, Leibniz identiﬁes the will as a judgment, which is practical reason. Will is
also characterized as ‘‘the thought of good or bad’’ and ‘‘the judgment about good
and bad.’’ In these texts, Leibniz identiﬁes volition or willing with a value judgment.
Willing an action is identical to judging that action to be the best available. To be
sure, the will consists of thinking or judging that is a conatus agendi, a striving or
impulse to act. So even in these passages, the will is a form of thought with special
appetitive properties, unlike the thoughts of mere reﬂection, contemplation, and
imagination. After the deﬁnition in True Piety, Leibniz continues:
If someone truly prefers to say that will is not a judgment about good and evil, but
instead is that striving to act that follows immediately from judgment, I will not argue
with him, provided that he acknowledges that the striving arises from judgment. For
the striving to act which does not arise from thought is brutish. (A 6.4:1360)

Leibniz is aware that his True Piety and On Postulates deﬁnitions are heterodox, and
is willing to accede to traditional terminology so long as it is recognized that the will is
the immediate consequence of the intellectual judgment.13 As he puts it in On Postulates, the two ways of talking ‘‘coincide’’ because God has made humans rational,
which means that we, by our very nature, strive for that which we perceive to be good.
I take these texts to suggest that at least into the late 1670s Leibniz was ﬂirting
with a fairly potent form of intellectualism. I know of no later texts in which
Leibniz intellectualizes the will to this extent. Leibniz’s considered view is stated

242

Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

in Theodicy 311: ‘‘But whatever perception one may have of the good, the effort to
act in accordance with the judgement, which in my opinion forms the essence of the
will, is distinct from it’’ (emphasis added). I believe that Leibniz comes to see that a
potent form of intellectualism such as that defended in his early writings faces
grave difﬁculties in explaining cases of incontinence and in assigning culpability
for sin. Call strong intellectualism the view that sin only involves cognitive error, a
breakdown of practical reason attributable only to reason. Call weak intellectualism
the view that while sin always involves cognitive error, it need not only involve
cognitive error. Plato’s (and Aristotle’s) Socrates is a strong intellectualist. I think it
is clear that by the early 1700s, when working on the New Essays, Leibniz defends
weak but not strong intellectualism.
Before turning to the details of his account of error and sin, it is worth comparing Leibniz’s understanding of the will to Luther’s. We have seen that Leibniz
links the fact that our wills are structured so that we act on the apparent good, just as
God acts on the actual good, to the imitatio dei doctrine. His interpretation of this
doctrine is important and controversial. As imitators of God, we share God’s cognitive structure insofar as our ﬁniteness permits. This means that our wills are free.
Unlike thinkers such as Augustine and Luther who stress that our wills are so
subverted by original sin that they are wholly enslaved, Leibniz generally emphasizes those aspects of our being that are godlike. Though by confession a Lutheran,
Leibniz rejects out of hand Luther’s denial of free will.14 In Tractatio de Deo et
Homine, Leibniz directly confronts the question of our postlapsarian faculties. His
analysis is instructive:
Now it must be seen, what of power remains in corrupted nature, i.e., what
remains of the divine image. This consists in two things: in the light of the
intellect, and in freedom of the will. (G 4:36)

In Principles of Nature and Grace 14, Leibniz sums up his investigation: the human
mind ‘‘imitates in its realm and in the small world in which it is allowed to work,
what God does in the large world’’ (AG 212).15 At our core, we are divine.

Error and Sin
Thinkers such as Augustine, Luther, and Calvin have little (initial) trouble explaining sin: it is our natural state. Leibniz, on the other hand, faces tremendous
difﬁculties—after all, how can ‘‘little gods’’ sin? While Leibniz has a detailed
metaphysical account of why there are creatures that sin in the best of all possible
worlds, my interest here is not with the theodicean project (as important as that is),
but rather with the psychological explanation of sin embedded in his theory of
human action. Like Thomas, Leibniz holds that we are constituted so as to pursue
the good, in which lies our true happiness.16 In contrast to the later Kantian
tradition, Leibniz holds that the demands of genuine happiness coincide with the
claims of religion and morality. Truly enlightened behavior is self-interested and
seeks the good; within Leibniz’s eudaimonistic ethics, the demands of the good are
never antithetical to the rational pursuit of self-interest.

The Intellectual Source of Sin 243

Leibniz dedicates an immense amount of intellectual energy to working
through problems concerning free will, moral psychology, and sin. Not surprisingly, he says different things concerning these topics, in different words, in different contexts. It is worth noting at the outset, however, that Leibniz is committed
to providing an explanation of sin that is located squarely within his larger account
of human error. Sin is one (particularly important) instance of a failure of reason,
and his explanation will appeal to the same sorts of features necessary for understanding cognitive error in general. Sin, being an instance of a free action, can
truck with no mystery.
The fundamental commitments of his psychology yield the following groundﬂoor account of moral failure. If an agent acts at all, she will act in accordance
with her perception of the best available action. Since the will is determined by the
representation of the good, wrongdoing is explicable by the inherent confusion and
inaccuracy of our perceptions or representations of the good. We can state this view
as the conjunction of the following: the will cannot move towards some possible
action x unless the understanding has judged x to be good; and, if the understanding has judged x to be the best, the will moves toward x. Nothing in this
account, of course, entails that x is done.
For Leibniz, a judgment by the intellect that some proposed action is good is
action-guiding.17 Unlike Hume, Leibniz holds that it is a conceptual truth that
if an agent judges x to be good, she will have some motivation to x. Likewise, it is a
conceptual truth that if an agent judges x to be good, she has a reason (or reasons)
that objectively justiﬁes xing. Since the judgment that x is good provides motives
and reasons, but not necessarily sufﬁcient motives or reasons, Leibniz is, in contemporary terms, a weak motive and reason internalist.18 Error is the result of
misapprehension, and misapprehension has several causes, all of them rooted in
our essential embodiment.
Leibniz holds that minds never lose their bodies.19 As physical creatures, we
have passions, which are drives and appetites for various states of affairs that are
conducive to our well-being and pleasurable to us as corporeal beings in a
physical world. The passions are mental states that are essentially linked to
bodies; they are helpful when prompting us to satisfy our basic needs as human
animals, and dangerous when prompting us to satisfy excessive or immoral desires. When Leibniz speaks psychologically, the passions refer to the sensuous
appetites, emotions, and nonrational parts of our nature. However, his metaphysical analysis is that these appetitive and aversive states are confused and
indistinct perceptions or thoughts (NE 1.2.11; NE 2.21.35, 72). Since we are beings
with organic bodies, we will always represent the universe from a particular point
of view (C 15/P 176). Since any particular perspective within the universe of
created spirits will be inevitably distorted (or ‘confused,’ in Leibniz’s preferred
terminology), the view sub specie aeternitatis is forever denied us, as is omniscience. Not surprisingly, then, Leibniz often attributes our cognitive opacity to
the pernicious inﬂuence of the passions, claiming that we are free in proportion
to our mastery over our passions. The following passages are typical, the ﬁrst from
a 1689 note, De Dispositionibus Internis, the second from a 1698 letter to
Molanus:

244 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom
You call us free insofar as we reason justly, and slaves when we are mastered by our
passions. . . . (Grua 327)
[I]t must be said that we are free in such a way that we [know] hare determined to
followi the perfection of our nature, which is to say reason, but that we are slaves
in such a way when we follow passion. . . . (Grua 481)20

All embodied beings, including angels and the blessed, are often confused and
unaware of much that is in their perceptual manifold. Indeed:
[God] was acting in our interests when he brought it about that we are often
ignorant and subject to confused perceptions—so that we can act the more quickly
by instinct, and not be troubled by excessively distinct sensations of hosts of objects
which, necessary though they are to nature’s plan, are not entirely agreeable to us.
(NE I2.10.6/RB 165)

In the New Essays, Leibniz takes the possibility that there might be no upper limit
to our intellectual enlightenment to be an advantage:
I am inclined to believe that it [intellectual pleasure in our increasing knowledge]
can increase ad inﬁnitum, for we do not know how far our knowledge and our
organs can be developed in the course of the eternity which lies before us. (NE
2.21.41/RB 194)

The passions contribute to our well-being and destruction because they are
powerful; Leibniz notes in passing that intense joy has killed people (NE 2.20.8/RB
167). In his most careful psychological writings, Leibniz depicts these appetitive and
aversive states, not as beliefs, but as ‘‘endeavours—or rather modiﬁcations of
endeavours—which arise from beliefs or opinions and are accompanied by pleasure or
displeasure’’ (NE 2.20.8/RB 167).21 If passions are not cognitive, how do they disrupt
the rule of reason? Having rejected the Stoic theory of the passions as false beliefs,
Leibniz cannot claim that they derail deliberate processes by posing as potential
candidates for belief and assent. Being impulses with no cognitive content, they cannot
inﬂuence the content of any particular perception or judgment; to claim they can
would ‘‘rationalize’’ the will and lead down the garden path to strong intellectualism.
Let us investigate this question by asking: what is necessary for right reasoning?
For humans, properly exercising theoretical or practical reason requires near ideal
empirical conditions under which to deliberate: we need time to consider the
various propositions or alternative principles of action before us; we need to be
rested, our basic bodily needs met, our emotions stable, our memory reliable, and
so on. Violate any of these conditions, and our chances of achieving theoretical or
practical rationality plunge dramatically. One way, then, that the passions disrupt
rationality is by truncating theoretical completeness. Embodied beings experience
powerful drives—working through Kant’s transcendental deduction is difﬁcult;
working through it when famished or exhausted is all but impossible. In the grip
of strong appetitive states driven by our bodies, we often fail to consider all the
relevant alternatives, cutting short the completeness of our deliberation.22
Reﬂecting on Leibniz’s reaction to Locke’s treatment of akrasia also provides
help in understanding how the passions unseat the rule of reason, without

The Intellectual Source of Sin 245

themselves being cognitive. In the ﬁrst edition of the Essay Locke embraced the
traditional doctrine that the will is determined by the greatest good perceived.
Confronted with the case of the drunkard who, cognizant of the greater good of
sobriety, still cannot resist ‘‘a glass of Wine, or the idle chat of a soaking Club,’’
Locke saves the phenomenon and abandons the traditional theory (Essay 2.21.35).
Leibniz comments:
There is merit and substance in these thoughts. However, I would not want them
to encourage people to believe that they should give up the old axioms that the
will pursues the greatest good, and ﬂees the greatest evil, of which it is sensible.
The neglect of things that are truly good arises from the fact that, on topics and in
circumstances where our senses are not much engaged, our thoughts are for the
most part what we might call ‘blind’—in Latin I call them cogitationes caecae.
(NE 2.21.35/RB 185)

Leibniz holds that ‘‘created minds and souls . . . cannot reason without symbols’’
(NE 2.21.73/RB 211). Some of our reasoning is purely symbolic in nature, as when
we reason in mathematics and geometry, letting placeholders ‘‘stand in’’ for the
mathematical or geometric objects themselves. Reasoning through symbols is often
indispensable—if one had to turn one’s mind’s attention to each mathematical
object in a long proof, progress would be tedious, if possible at all. We often reason
analogously when thinking about God or virtue, using words as place-holders for
the ideas denoted by these words. When our cognition remains only at the verbal
level, such thinking is ‘‘empty of perception and sensibility’’ (NE 2.21.35/RB 186).
The problem with such sensibly shorn thinking in practical reasoning is that it
packs little motivational punch for anyone lacking a robust moral acculturation.23
As Leibniz puts it, ‘‘the ﬁnest moral precepts and the best prudential rules have
weight only in a soul which is as sensitive to them as to what opposes them’’
(NE 2.21.35/RB 186). Since passions ‘‘are accompanied by pleasure or displeasure’’
(NE 2.20.10/RB 167), it is no wonder that in such cases, ‘‘the morally good is
mastered by the agreeably good which makes more impression on souls when they
are disturbed by the passions’’ (T 154/H 220).
Since the true good ensures our happiness, or lasting joy, we are inclined to
seek joy and avoid sorrow or pain by our very nature (NE 1.2.3). Leibniz often
compares the conative drive of the soul toward the good with the force of a rock
falling toward the center of the earth, which, taking the most direct route downward, shatters on protruding rocks.24 This is Leibniz’s diagnosis of our state when,
under strain from appetition and passions, we mistake a temporary pleasure for
a lasting one, and exchange happiness for misery. In a short work entitled On
Tendencies, Leibniz writes that this tendency to real happiness:
is not able to be ﬁrmly and originally assigned as the object of our tendencies, any
more than a stone could be assigned the optimal path to the center, without
hitting and shattering on the way down. (Grua 487)

Leibniz does not state why this world could not contain such optimizing laws—
perhaps such a possible world would fall short in producing as much variety
compatible with a simplicity of laws—but adds: ‘‘rising above the original

246 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

tendencies of man or his ﬁrst nature, reason and experience supervene to moderate, which is absent in the stone’’ (Grua 487).25
At times Leibniz talks of the subversion of reason by passion as instances of
deception, albeit cases of self-deception:
But free will tends towards good, and if it meets with evil it is by accident, for
the reason that this evil is concealed beneath the good, and masked, as it were.
(Grua 487)26

We can put Leibniz’s various remarks about how sin occurs in a paradigmatic case
involving the passions into outline form:
(1) At time t1, under fairly optimal epistemic conditions, agent S knows
that xing is wrong.
(2) At time t2, under the inﬂuence of the passions, S is motivated to x.
(3) At time t2, S’s all-things-considered judgment concerning xing is
occluded.
(4) At time t3, still impassioned, S (mistakenly) judges that the good (or
pleasure) involved in xing outweighs the bad.
(5) At time t4, still impassioned, S chooses to x.

S is operating under ‘‘fairly optimal epistemic conditions’’ when he is in a state of
(rough) emotional equilibrium, his basic bodily needs are satisﬁed, and he is attending to all of his knowledge concerning x. Were S to act at t1, he would avoid x,
for one always
move[s] towards what one ﬁnds good and away from what one ﬁnds bad, the
endeavour arising immediately out of one’s awareness of those things. This deﬁnition has as a corollary the famous axiom that from will and power together,
action follows; since any endeavour results in action unless it is prevented. (NE
2.21.5/RB 172–173)

It is passion that explains how an agent can go from knowing some action is
wrong, in (1) of the foregoing schema, to a state in (3) where such knowledge is
merely dispositional. (2) is the stage where passions wreak their damage by causing
slippage between optimal judgment and action. The resultant intellectual occlusion can be caused by a number of factors: the inﬂuence of ‘‘minute insensible
perceptions’’ (NE 2.21.36/RB 188), ‘‘the (often undetectable) traces left behind by
earlier perceptions’’ (NE 2.21.12/RB 177), and confused thoughts (NE 2.21.35).
These factors, combined with the strong desires accompanying the passions, distract or misdirect the intellect’s focus from the wrongness of x to the pleasure
anticipated from xing. The potent promise of pleasure emanating from xing, together with the temporary repression or inattention to some of the morally salient
features S knew at t1, results in the misjudgment of (4), which erroneously weighs
present pleasure, or joy, over lasting pleasure, or happiness.
Three features are striking in Leibniz’s account. First, with some modiﬁcations, it is Thomas’s explanation for sin. Second, while the passions are indicted
in the mental processes that end in sin, all sin involves a mistaken practical
conclusion; moral evil ineluctably involves ignorance or error. Third, Leibniz’s
analysis of sin relies on the fact that decision making for ﬁnite beings takes time.

The Intellectual Source of Sin

247

This essential temporality of practical reasoning plays a key role in his analysis of
how we fail to follow reason’s rule.

How to Achieve Our Conversion
We are now in position to investigate whether the will, in Leibniz’s psychological
model, does any real work. What are we to make of passages such as the following
in the New Essays?
For we can only will what we think good, and the more developed the faculty of
understanding is the better are the choices of the will. And, in the other direction,
in so far as a man wills vigorously, he determines his thoughts by his own choice
instead of being determined and swept along by involuntary perceptions. (NE
2.21.19/RB 180)

Since Leibniz is emphatic that the will is subordinate to the intellect, his claim
that willing vigorously determines thought raises questions of consistency. Leibniz’s advice on moral therapy and spiritual enlightenment in the New Essays is
instructive on this question.
Freedom of the understanding is the heart of Leibniz’s positive analysis of
freedom. We have been created to be responsive to reasons; we are beings with
judgment-sensitive attitudes and responses. When we act in accordance with (true)
reason, we are most free. Freedom consists in the mastery of (true) reason; by
acting on distinct knowledge we ‘‘achieve our own conversion,’’ whereas by acting
primarily on the basis of confused perceptions and passions we secure our own
perversion (NE 2.21.23/RB 182; T 310–311). Spirits not only mirror the world, but
mirror God in being self-conscious and capable of understanding necessary and
eternal truths. As spirits, we are most true to our natures when the self-mastery of
reason is operative. Self-mastery involves tightening the connection between (true)
judgment and action. Leibniz’s counsel on minimizing the slippage between
(true) judgment and action focuses on two fronts: increasing the vividness and
vivacity of ideas of the good, and moral training and practice (which may or may
not involve the sensory embellishment of key ideas). This last point falls within
the province of the will.
Leibniz maintains that many ostensible cases of incontinence involve people
who lack real or robust knowledge of the good (NE 2.21.39). Such people have
doubts, either because they never understood the reasons or proofs for true religion
or immortality, or because they no longer remember (or misremember) such proofs.
Since belief in morality, for such people, lacks not only certainty but even probability, their actions fail as evidence for the existence of weakness of will.
Others ‘‘have the idea of an absent good or evil, but only very faintly, so it is no
wonder that it has almost no inﬂuence on them’’ (NE 2.21.35/RB 186). The faint (or
blind) idea of x is never sufﬁcient for knowledge of x; when employing only blind
thoughts, ‘‘if we prefer the worse it is because we have a sense of the good it
contains but not of the evil it contains or of the good which exists on the opposite
side’’ (NE 2.21.35/RB 186). While blind thoughts or symbols are often useful in

248 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

reasoning in formal domains, the results of such symbolic calculation only constitute knowledge when the reasoner thoroughly understands the denotations of the
signs, which Leibniz denies in cases of purely blind notions of God and the good.
When our ideas of God, moral principles, and evil are accurate (as far as they
go) but blind, Leibniz recommends a two-stage approach: reviewing the validity of
the reasoning or proof and then (when possible) ﬂeshing out the principle or truth
in vivid sensory detail. The ﬁrst exercise guards against mistakes and lapses in
memory, a malady Leibniz thinks is more widespread than is commonly supposed,
and in some sense helps ‘‘anchor’’ the truth for us. The second exercise magniﬁes
the motivational pull of these truths—the idea being to get the passions working for
our salvation and (true) happiness. In this connection Leibniz tells the tale of the
Prince of Assassins drugging his soldiers and transporting them to awaken in a
beautiful (if sham) Muslim paradise so they would not fear death in carrying out
their dangerous assignments (NE 2.12.37).27
Leibniz admits that some central ideas of religion and morality are resistant to
sensory viviﬁcation—the idea of God being a case in point—but takes hope in the
fact that people can be strongly motivated by goals that lack signiﬁcant sensory
content. When the ambitious or miserly
acquire honours or riches they get but feeble pleasures from them and often
almost none at all, because their thoughts are always on the next move. Nature the
Architect did very well, it seems to me, making men so sensitive to things which
have so little effect on the senses. If we were incapable of becoming ambitious
or miserly, it would be hard for us—in the present state of human nature—to
become virtuous and rational enough to work towards our own perfection in face
of the present pleasures which distract us from it. (NE 2.21.65/RB 205; see also
NE 2.21.37)

The second approach to tightening the connection between (true) judgment
and action focuses squarely on moral training. In the Preface to the New Essays
Leibniz claims that in general his system is closer to Plato’s, while Locke’s is closer
to Aristotle’s, ‘‘although each of us parts company at many points from the teaching
of both of these ancient writers’’ (RB 47–48). This is one such departure. In the
Phaedo, Plato writes that ‘‘the soul of the philosopher most disdains the body, ﬂees
from it and seeks to be by itself ’’ (Phaedo 65d). Plato views the body and its senses
as a prison that, by its very nature, impedes our pursuit of the true and the good.
Since full philosophical success appears to require death, we are enjoined to
disdain the body and practice for death.
Unlike the Platonist, Leibniz acknowledges the value of the passions and
thus the legitimacy of satisfying, in temperance, bodily appetites (G 7:86/L 426).
Leibniz stresses the importance of moral education. Ideally, the training and inculcation toward virtue begins at a young age (Nicomachean Ethics 1103b23–26;
NE 2.21.35). Like Aristotle, Leibniz stresses understanding why moral (and in the
latter’s case, religious) truths are true, at least in cases of the morally immature.
Understanding the reasons helps ground behavior. Like Aristotle, Leibniz recognizes that ethical education consists of both cognitive and noncognitive elements,
and thus that the development of practical wisdom and virtue requires training our

The Intellectual Source of Sin 249

nonrational dispositions. Like Aristotle, Leibniz preaches proper habituation—for
habit molds character—exempliﬁed in the virtuous person, for whom it is second
nature for the passions and desires to follow the rule of reason (Nicomachean
Ethics 1102b13–28, 1105a27–b1; NE 2.21.35, 67). We become virtuous by doing virtuous actions (Nicomachean Ethics 1103a19–25). Habit is what aligns our appetitive
element, the will, whose object is too often present pleasure, with the proper object
of the will and intellect, the true good, leading to happiness (Nicomachean Ethics
1099a13–15, 1156b16–17; NE 2.21.67). Practice and habit have cognitive and motivational import; acting well, in the fullness of time, fully integrates conative and
rational elements, allowing spirits to
love and imitate the author of all good, as they should, ﬁnding pleasure in the
consideration of his perfections according to the nature of genuinely pure love,
which takes pleasure in the happiness of the beloved. (Mon 90/AG 224)

The lover of God and the good has achieved her end: perfect harmony between
her affective states and reason. All of her pleasures and emotions center on the
good; having achieved virtue and practical wisdom, she can no longer sin.28
This program of ethical education and moral therapy is predicated on the
habit of exercised will and reason. In his critical remarks on Descartes’ Principles,
Leibniz comments that there is
one thing we recognize to be within the power of will—to command attention
and exertion. And so the will, though it does not bring about any opinion in us,
can nevertheless contribute to it obliquely. Thus it happens that men often
ﬁnally come to believe what they will to be true, after having accustomed the
mind to attend most strongly to the things which they favor. (G 4:356–357/
L 384–385)

Several pages later, he expands on the mission of the will ‘‘to prepare the mind well
in advance’’ (G 4:362/L 388). This involves attending to experience, ours and
others,’ so as to steer away from circumstances conducive to danger, and ‘‘training
the mind to follow a deﬁnite series and method when thinking, so that later the
required attitude offers itself spontaneously, as it were’’ (G 4:362/L 388).
The strategy of dramatic rehearsal, in full rational equilibrium, is Leibniz’s
principal therapeutic practice for shaping the kind of person who thinks and acts
from a settled disposition of reason and virtue. Leibniz holds ‘‘there is as much
connection or determination amongst thoughts as amongst motions’’ (NE 2.21.13/
RB 178); further, we cannot ‘‘will to will’’: rather, ‘‘we can only will what we think
good’’ (NE 2.21.19/RB 180). We know from experience under which circumstances
we are especially susceptible to the perturbations of the passions and sensual
enticement. Our only chance, under these conditions, is for ‘‘the mind [to] be
prepared in advance, and be already stepping from thought to thought, so that it
will not be too much held up when the path becomes slippery and treacherous’’
(NE 2.21.47/RB 195–196). Such a practitioner, because of her training and ﬁxed
habits, is able to rise above the cacophony of emotional turbulence, suspend her
appetitive drives, and ask where reason guides. Reﬂecting upon the competing
practical judgments recognized by the intellect, she is able to evaluate which

250 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

choice involves what reason asserts to be a true good. It is through engaging in
metajudgment
that we become masters of ourselves, and can bring it about that we have certain
thoughts and that when the time comes we shall will according to our present
preference and according to reason’s decrees. (NE 2.21.47/RB 196)

In the New Essays, Leibniz never veers from insisting that we can transcend our
vulnerability to the power and irrational aspects of the passions if we have skillfully
trained our affective and conative elements—the power to suspend strong desires
and reconsider practical conclusions ‘‘always takes place in determinate ways and
never without reasons—never by the ﬁctitious principle of total indifference or
equilibrium’’ (NE 2.21.47/RB 198). The reﬂexive power of reason, coupled with sure
habits of virtue, result in the self-rule of rational autonomy.

Culpability
Weak intellectualists deny what we might term strong or synchronic akrasia: acting
at time t1 contrary to what an agent judges to be right at time t1. However, weak
intellectualists do countenance weak or diachronic akrasia: acting at time t2
contrary to what an agent judged to be right at time t1. I take Aristotle, Thomas,
and Leibniz to be exemplars of this tradition. Each is sensitive to the temporal
dimension of decision making, and explains conﬂicts between an agent’s action
and values, judgments and knowledge by distinguishing types of knowledge an
agent can attend to and neglect in a period of deliberation. Thus while Medea
knew, when in a period of rational and emotional equilibrium, that murdering her
children was wrong, under the inﬂuence of the passions she was no longer attending to that piece of knowledge; at the fatal moment, it was merely dispositional, since she was focusing on the good of revenge and retribution.
Serious problems remain. First, ignorance often excuses; total ignorance
usually exculpates. Second, in the sense of ‘‘freedom of will’’ that I have called
the heart of Leibniz’s account of freedom, one is free in inverse proportion to the
‘‘imposition or constraint . . . which the passions impose’’ (NE 2.21.7/RB 175). Yet
this entails that we are least free when we sin. Philosophically and theologically,
this doctrine leads to the rocks.
Leibniz has several replies we should distinguish in answering the ﬁrst problem.
First, nondispositional ignorance which we possess and cannot reasonably be expected to lack, is exculpatory. Leibniz stresses in several passages the ‘‘weakness of
the human mind [which] arises from a lack of attention and memory and cannot be
completely overcome’’ (G 4:356/L 384; see also G 4:362/L 388). Nor can we ever
escape what Leibniz calls the ‘‘involuntary thoughts’’ that come from our senses
(NE 2.21.12/RB 177).
Second, Medea’s ignorance of the wrongness of murder, being merely dispositional, is culpable. She failed both to call forth knowledge she possessed dispositionally, and to apply that knowledge to the case at hand. Since by her past actions
she created her intemperate character, she is blameworthy for the actions that follow

The Intellectual Source of Sin

251

from it. The reason for Medea’s action lies in her history; she acted in the past in ways
that brought her to respond as she does now, and therein lies her responsibility.
Leibniz’s whole program of disciplined self-transformation, in which our appetites
and passions are trained to harmonize and seek the object of reason, depends upon
the truth of determinism. As Leibniz puts it, ‘‘we achieve our own conversion or
perversion depending on what our experience has been’’ (NE 2.21.23/RB 182).
Leibniz’s theory of freedom does entail that we are least free (in terms of the
freedom of will under discussion) when we sin. However, properly understood, this
is not surprising. To say that we are least free when we sin is simply to say that we
are irrational when we sin. Since acting freely for Leibniz is acting rationally (on
the basis of the perception of the good), a failure of rationality is a failure to act in
as free a manner as we can. Because freedom of this type does admit of degrees, to
say we are less free does not entail that we are not responsible for our lack of selfmastery and rationality. The people we have made ourselves in the past determine
whether we remain in control, and act with reason, or become the passive objects
of the passions and sensory appetites. Leibniz’s approach couldn’t be more different from that of his libertarian adversaries. Their insistence on the privileges of
an unmoved mover severs the dependence of the will on the intellect. Leibniz
turns this objection on its head—if our intellectual perception was always pellucid,
and our will was determined by the intellect’s judgment, we would always be free.
I have argued that Leibniz is a thinker who follows Thomas in maintaining
that the will pursues what the intellect judges to be good. Moral evil always
involves a cognitive error. Within this tradition, for any goods x and y, we cannot
both believe that x is better than y at time t1, and choose y at t1. However, for any
goods x and y, we can both believe that x is better than y at t1, and choose y at t2. In
the latter case, however, we actually believe that y is better than x at t2.
Leibniz was well aware that we sometimes fail to carry out our intended
actions. The booming, buzzing phenomenal world, along with our own appetites,
impinge all too frequently on our theoretical and practical deliberations. In
Theodicy 311, Leibniz puts the point as follows:
As for the parallel between the relation of the understanding to the true and that of
the will to the good, one must know that a clear and distinct perception of a truth
contains within it actually the afﬁrmation of this truth: thus the understanding is
necessitated in that direction. But whatever perception one may have of the good,
the effort to act in accordance with the judgement, which in my opinion forms the
essence of the will, is distinct from it. Thus, since there is need of time to raise this
effort to its climax, it may be suspended, and even changed, by a new perception
or inclination which passes athwart it, which diverts the mind from it, and which
even causes it sometimes to make a contrary judgment. Hence it comes that our
soul has many means of resisting the truth which it knows, and that the passage
from mind to heart is so long. (H 314)29

When the suspended action was in accordance with the perception of the actual
best, it is a tragedy that ‘‘the passage from mind to heart is so long’’ (H 314).30
Conversely, suspending when the intended action was a misperception of the
actual best is all for the good.

252 Leibniz: Nature and Freedom

We can now appreciate Leibniz’s claim that, even though moral error ineluctably involves cognitive failure of some sort,
[i]n truth, true happiness requires less knowledge but greater strength and goodness of will, so that the dullest idiot can achieve it just as easily as can the cleverest
and most educated person. (NE 2.21.66/RB 207)

Leibniz’s point is that true happiness requires far less intellectual facility than is
involved in the pure or applied sciences. He is calling attention to the fact that all
the intellect in the world will not help the brilliant person with poor habituation.
Often the root of one’s moral lapse lies more in a failure to attend to knowledge
that one already knows, keeping it steadily in view right through action.

Summary
While much remains unstudied, this propaedeutic suggests a Leibniz who conceives of human nature as both godlike and weak, and who implicates the intellect
and character in his diagnosis of moral failing. This Leibniz stresses our essential
embodiment to an extent not usually recognized, at one point wondering ‘‘how far
our knowledge and our organs can be developed in the course of the eternity which
lies before us’’ (NE 2.21.41/RB 198). This Leibniz sees himself as working within
and modifying an Aristotelian tradition of philosophical psychology that runs
through Thomas. In the texts under consideration, Leibniz attempts to provide an
account of psychological conﬂict that does not involve disunifying the mind, and
that connects in deep and important ways to core doctrines in his metaphysics.
Because Leibniz’s account of moral error is at the intersection of so many fundamental problems and conceptual pressures, it occupies a point of maximal stress
within his attempt to articulate our nature in an intelligible world. As such it
represents fertile ground, both for understanding his motivations for some of his
most basic assumptions, and for assessing the overall coherence of his psychological, theological, and metaphysical principles.

Notes
Dan Kervick provided rich philosophical engagement on a very preliminary version of this essay that was
presented at the University of Massachusetts Homecoming Conference of October 1999. Comments
from colleagues at Iowa State University, in particular those from Joseph Kupfer and William Robinson,
improved an intermediate version. The essay owes the most to Donald Rutherford, who ﬁrst commented
on it at the Central Division of the American Philosophical Association in April 2000. Then and later he
has been a constant source of incisive criticism and encouragement. My thinking about Leibniz on the
metaphysics of free will and moral psychology has been most affected by Robert Sleigh, who ﬁrst
awakened me to the richness of Leibniz’s writings in these areas.
1. Ovid 1958: 7.20–21.
2. See Protagoras 345e, 355, 358c; Meno 77e.
3. All translations are from Plato 1997.
4. Van Limborch is paraphrasing Molina’s famous deﬁnition of freedom (1953: 14).
5. Citations to Turretin’s Institutio are to topic, question, and article.
6. My thanks to Robert Sleigh, whose translations of the Confessio Philosophi and Du Franc
Arbitre I use in this essay.

The Intellectual Source of Sin

253

7. For other such claims, see A 6.4:1376, 2552.
8. Leibniz also quotes Medea’s words in T 297.
9. For some of the recent literature on the Private Miracle passage, see Paull 1992; Borst 1992;
Murray 1995; Davidson 1998; Sleigh, Chappell, and Della Rocca 1998; Sleigh 1999.
10. See also De malo, q. 16, c. 5.
11. See, for example, Grua 299–300.
12. See also T 291.
13. In On the Affections, a text from the same period, Leibniz provides a much more orthodox
deﬁnition, which is the one he retains in later writings: ‘‘Willing is the striving which follows from the
judgment of good and bad that is present in the agent’’ (Grua 512; emphasis added).
14. Leibniz attributes Luther’s mistaken denial of free will to the poor deﬁnitions of freedom
taught in the schools of his day (Grua 227). In the ‘‘Preliminary Dissertation’’ to the Theodicy Leibniz
provides a gloss on Luther’s and Melanchthon’s antagonism to philosophy (T pd12).
15. See Mon 83.
16. See T 309.
17. See NE 2.21.5; T 336; LC 5.8. Hume forcibly argues for the opposing view: ‘‘reason is perfectly
inert, and can never either prevent or produce any action or affection’’ (Treatise 294).
18. For a guide to this terminology, see Brink 1989: 39. By contrast, God has arranged the apprehension of the good by the blessed to be necessarily efﬁcacious. Leibniz also maintains that should
any of us in via have ‘‘a very clear recognition of the best’’ such perspicacity is sufﬁcient for action (T 310/
H 313). When discussing these matters, Leibniz attempts to balance his claim that we are little gods
while maintaining the essential distance between God and (embodied) creatures, since all creatures
have ‘‘some confused perception mingled with distinct knowledge’’ (T 310/H 314).
19. See NE Preface/RB 58; NE 2.21.73; T pd10; T 124. I am not taking a stand on how to interpret
this claim within the idealism of Leibniz’s mature metaphysics. In metaphysical rigor, it is false to call
ﬁnite minds ‘‘embodied beings’’; rather, we are minds that never lack bodies, where this last phrase is
understood to entail some ontological reduction. In what follows, I refer to humans as ‘‘embodied
beings’’ (and like cognate descriptions), exchanging ontological precision for ease of expression.
20. Text within brackets was deleted by Leibniz, while text within carets was added. For similar
claims regarding the slavery of the passions, see G 4:362/L 388; NE 2.21.8; T 289.
21. See also T 310, where he writes that ‘‘confused perceptions . . . beget passions’’ (H 314).
22. See, for example, NE 2.21.32, 62.
23. See, for example, T 311.
24. See Grua 15, 484; NE 2.21.36.
25. For a compelling guide to interpreting the criteria of variety of phenomena and economy of
laws, see Rutherford 1995a: 22–45.
26. See also NE 2.21.22.
27. Public health agencies in the United States are now spending millions on images designed to
add ﬂesh and bones to the statistics regarding the danger of smoking. For some of the psychological
literature on the ‘‘vividness’’ effect, see Taylor and Thompson 1982: 155–181, and Eagly and Chaiken
1993: 279–280. I am indebted to Peter Vranas for these references.
28. Compare with Nicomachean Ethics 1152a1–8.
29. For other texts in which Leibniz talks about the suspension of actions, see Grua 384, 324; NE
2.21.35, 47; T 64; LC 5.11.
30. Consider the well-known letter to Coste of December 19, 1707: ‘‘God or a perfectly wise person
will always choose the best that they know of, and if one side is better than the other, they would choose
neither one nor the other. The passions often take the place of reason in other intelligent substances,
and we can always assert, with respect to the will in general, that choice follows the greatest inclination
(by which I understand both passions and reasons, true or apparent). . . . Thus when God chooses, it is by
reason of the best, and when a person chooses, it is the option that struck him the most. If he chooses
what he sees as less useful and pleasant in some respects, perhaps it becomes more agreeable to him
through a whim, or contrariness, or for similar reasons which belong to a depraved taste; these are
determining reasons, even though they are not conclusive reasons. And we will never ﬁnd a contrary
reason’’ (G 4:401–402/AG 195).

This page intentionally left blank

Bibliography

Adams, Robert M. 1994. Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Alexander, Archibald. 1898. Theories of the Will in the History of Philosophy. New York:
Scribner.
Angeles, Peter A. 1981. Dictionary of Philosophy. New York: Harper and Row.
Antognazza, Maria Rosa. 1999. Trinità e Incarnazione: Il rapporto tra ﬁlosoﬁa e teologia
rivelata nel pensiero di Leibniz. Milan: Vita e Pensiero.
Arendt, Hannah. 1978. The Life of the Mind: Willing. Orlando, Fl.: Harcourt Brace.
Aristotle. 1984. The Complete Works of Aristotle. Ed. Jonathan Barnes. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Arthur, Richard. 1989. ‘‘Russell’s Conundrum: On the Relation of Leibniz’s Monads to the
Continuum.’’ In An Intimate Relation: Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science,
ed. J. R. Brown and J. Mittelstraß. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 171–202.
—. 1998. ‘‘Inﬁnite Aggregates and Phenomenal Wholes.’’ Leibniz Society Review 8:
25–45.
—. 1999a. ‘‘Inﬁnite Number and the World Soul: In Defence of Carlin and Leibniz.’’
Leibniz Review 9: 105–116.
—. 1999b. ‘‘The Transcendentality of p and Leibniz’s Philosophy of Mathematics.’’
Proceedings of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics 12:
13–19.
—. 2001. ‘‘Leibniz on Inﬁnite Number, Inﬁnite Wholes, and the Whole World: A Reply
to Gregory Brown.’’ Leibniz Review 11: 103–116.
Bassler, O. Bradley. 1998. ‘‘Leibniz on the Indeﬁnite as Inﬁnite.’’ Review of Metaphysics 51:
849–874.
Beeley, Philip. 1999. ‘‘Mathematics and Nature in Leibniz’s Early Philosophy.’’ In
The Young Leibniz and His Philosophy (1646–1676), ed. S. Brown. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
123–145.
—. 2002. ‘‘Leibniz on Wachter’s Elucidarius cabalisticus: A Critical Edition of the SoCalled ‘Réfutation de Spinoza.’ ’’ Leibniz Review 12: i–viii, 1–14.
Belaval, Yvon. 1962. Leibniz: Initiation à sa philosophie. Paris: Vrin.
Bellarmino, Roberto. 1873. Opera Omnia. Ed. Justinus Fevre. Paris: Minerva.

255

256 Bibliography
Bennett, Jonathan. 1976. Linguistic Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reprint: Indianapolis: Hackett, 1989.
—. 1991a. ‘‘Analysis without Noise.’’ In Mind and Common Sense, ed. Radu Bogdan.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 15–36.
—. 1991b. ‘‘Folk-Psychological Explanations.’’ In The Future of Folk Psychology, ed. John
D. Greenwood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 176–195.
—. 2001. Learning from Six Philosophers. 2 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bobro, Marc, and Kenneth Clatterbaugh. 1996. ‘‘Unpacking the Monad: Leibniz’s Theory
of Causality.’’ Monist 79: 408–425.
Bodéüs, Richard. 1993. Leibniz-Thomasius, Correspondence, 1663–1672. Paris: Vrin.
Bolton, Martha. 2004. ‘‘Leibniz to Arnauld: Platonic and Aristotelian Themes on Matter and
Corporeal Substance.’’ In Lodge 2004.
Borst, Clive. 1992. ‘‘Leibniz and the Compatibilist Account of Freedom.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 24: 49–58.
Bourke, Vernon J. 1964. Will in Western Thought. New York: Sheed and Ward.
Brandom, Robert B. 1981. ‘‘Leibniz and Degrees of Perception.’’ Journal of the History of
Philosophy 19: 447–479.
Brink, David O. 1989. Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, Gregory. 1998. ‘‘Who’s Afraid of Inﬁnite Numbers? Leibniz and the World Soul.’’
Leibniz Society Review 8: 113–125.
—. 2000. ‘‘Leibniz on Wholes, Unities and Inﬁnite Number.’’ Leibniz Review 10:
21–51.
Carlin, Laurence. 1997. ‘‘Inﬁnite Accumulations and Pantheistic Implications: Leibniz and
the ‘Anima Mundi.’ ’’ Leibniz Society Review 7: 1–24.
Carriero, John. 1993. ‘‘Leibniz on Inﬁnite Resolution and Intra-Mundane Contingency.’’
Studia Leibnitiana 25: 1–26.
Cassirer, Ernst. 1902. Leibniz’ System in seinen wissenschaftlichen Grundlagen. Darmstadt:
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1962.
Castañeda, Hector-Neri. 1990. ‘‘Leibniz’s View of Contingent Truth in the Late 1680’s.’’ In
Heinekamp, Lenzen, and Schneider 1990: 255–272.
Clarke, Samuel. 1998. A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God. Ed. Ezio Vailati.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Couturat, Louis. 1901. La Logique de Leibniz, d’après des documents inédits. Paris: Felix
Alcan. Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1961.
—. 1902. ‘‘Sur la Métaphysique de Leibniz.’’ Revue de métaphysique et de morale 10: 1–25.
Reprinted in Frankfurt 1972.
Cover, J. A., and John O’Leary-Hawthorne. 1999. Substance and Individuation in Leibniz.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cover, J. A., and John Hawthorne. 2000a. ‘‘Inﬁnite Analysis and the Problem of the Lucky
Proof.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 32: 151–165.
—. 2000b. ‘‘Leibnizian Modality Again: Reply to Murray.’’ Leibniz Review 10: 87–103.
Cudworth, Ralph. 1996. A Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality. Ed. Sarah
Hutton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davidson, Jack. 1996. ‘‘Untying the Knot: Leibniz on Divine Foreknowledge of Future
Contingents.’’ History of Philosophy Quarterly 12: 89–116.
—. 1998. ‘‘Imitators of God: Leibniz on Human Freedom.’’ Journal of the History of
Philosophy 36: 387–411.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1993. The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque. Trans. Tom Conley. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Bibliography

257

Dennett, Daniel C. 1989. ‘‘True Believers: The Intentional Strategy and Why It Works.’’ In
The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 13–35.
Dola, Ludovicus a. 1634. De Modo Conjuntionis Concursuum Dei et Creaturum. Lyon.
Eagly, Alice, and Shelly Chaiken. 1993. The Psychology of Attitudes. Fort Worth, Tex.:
Harcourt Brace.
Earman, John. 1989. World Enough and Space-Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Feynman, Richard, Robert B. Leighton, and Matthew Sands. 1963. The Feynman Lectures
on Physics: Mainly Mechanics, Radiation, and Heat. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Fichant, Michel. 1974. ‘‘La ‘réforme’ leibnizienne de la dymanique, d’après des textes
inédits.’’ Studia Leibnitianna Supplementa 13: 195–214.
Ficino, Marsilio. 1559. Theologia Platonica, de immortalitate animorum. Paris. Reprint,
Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1995.
Frankfurt, Harry (ed.). 1972. Leibniz: A Collection of Critical Essays. Notre Dame, Ind.:
University of Notre Dame Press.
Freddoso, Alfred J. 1986. ‘‘The Necessity of Nature.’’ Midwest Studies in Philosophy 11: 215–
257.
Friedmann, Georges. 1962. Leibniz et Spinoza. Rev. ed. Paris: Gallimard.
Futch, Michael J. 2001. ‘‘Time and Causation in Leibniz’s Metaphysics.’’ Ph.D. diss., Emory
University.
Garber, Daniel. 1982. ‘‘Motion and Metaphysics in the Young Leibniz.’’ In Hooker 1982:
160–184.
—. 1985. ‘‘Leibniz and the Foundations of Physics: The Middle Years.’’ In The Natural
Philosophy of Leibniz, ed. Kathleen Okruhlik and James Brown. Dordrecht: Reidel,
27–130.
—. 1992a. Descartes’s Metaphysical Physics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—. 1992b. ‘‘Review of Catherine Wilson, Leibniz’s Metaphysics: A Historical and
Comparative Study, and Robert C. Sleigh, Jr., Leibniz and Arnauld: A Commentary on
their Correspondence.’’ Journal of Philosophy 89: 151–165.
—. 1995. ‘‘Leibniz: Physics and Philosophy.’’ In Jolley 1995: 270–352.
Garber, Daniel, and Michael Ayers (eds.). 1998. The Cambridge History of SeventeenthCentury Philosophy. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Garrett, Don. 1997. Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gentz, William H. (ed.). 1986. The Dictionary of Bible and Religion. Nashville: Abingdon
Press.
Gibbard, Allan. 1990. Wise Choices, Apt Feelings. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Ginet, Carl. 1995. ‘‘Reasons Explanation of Action: An Incompatibilist Account.’’
In O’Connor 1995: 69–94.
Grosholz, Emily. 1991. Cartesian Method and the Problem of Reduction. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Grua, Gaston. 1953. Jurisprudence Universelle et Théodicée selon Leibniz. Paris: Press Universitaires de France. Reprint, New York: Garland, 1985.
—. 1956. La Justice humaine selon Leibniz. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Reprint, New York: Garland, 1985.
Hacking, Ian. 1974. ‘‘Inﬁnite Analysis.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 6: 126–130.
Hardin, C. L. 1988. Color for Philosophers: Unweaving the Rainbow. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Hare, R. M. 1952. The Language of Morals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—. 1963. Freedom and Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

258 Bibliography
—. 1981. Moral Thinking: Its Levels, Method and Point. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hartz, Glenn. 1992. ‘‘Leibniz’s Phenomenalisms.’’ Philosophical Review 101: 511–549.
—. 1998. ‘‘Why Corporeal Substances Keep Popping Up in Leibniz’s Later Philosophy.’’
British Journal for the History of Philosophy 6: 193–207.
Heinekamp, Albert. 1969. Das Problem des Guten bei Leibniz. Bonn: H. Bouvier.
Heinekamp, Albert, Wolfgang Lenzen, and Martin Schneider (eds.). 1990. Mathesis rationis: Feschrift für Heinrich Schepers. Münster: Nodus.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1839. The English Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury. 11 vols. Ed.
William Molesworth. London: John Bohn. Reprint, Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1966.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1994. Leviathan, with Selected Variants from the Latin Edition of 1668. Ed.
Edwin Curley. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Hobbes, Thomas, and John Bramhall. 1999. Hobbes and Bramhall on Liberty and Necessity.
Ed. Vere Chappell. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hofmann, Joseph E. 1974. Leibniz in Paris, 1672–1676: His Growth to Mathematical Maturity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hooker, Michael (ed.). 1982. Leibniz: Critical and Interpretive Essays. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Ishiguro, Hidé. 1990. Leibniz’s Philosophy of Logic and Language. 2nd ed. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Izquierdo, Sebastian. 1670. Opus theologicum iuxta atque philosophicum de Deo uno. Rome.
Jalabert, Jacques. 1981. ‘‘Leibniz et Malebranche.’’ Les études philosophiques, 279–292.
Jolley, Nicholas (ed.). 1995. The Cambridge Companion to Leibniz. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
—. 1998. ‘‘Causality and Creation in Leibniz.’’ Monist 81: 591–611.
Kent, Bonnie. 1995. Virtues of the Will. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University Press.
Knebel, Sven. 1991a. ‘‘Necessitas moralis ad optimum.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 23: 3–24.
—. 1991b. ‘‘Scientia Media.’’ Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte 34: 262–294.
—. 1992. ‘‘Necessitas Moralis ad Optimum (III): Naturgesetz und Induktionsproblem
in der Jesuitenscholastik während des zweiten Drittels des 17. Jahrhunderts.’’ Studia
Leibnitiana 24: 182–215.
Kraye, Jill (ed.). 1997. Cambridge Translations of Renaissance Philosophical Texts. Vol. 1.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kulstad, Mark. 1977. ‘‘Leibniz’s Conception of Expression.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 9: 55–76.
—. 1982. ‘‘Some Difﬁculties in Leibniz’s Deﬁnition of Perception.’’ In Hooker 1982:
65–78.
—. 1990. ‘‘Appetition in the Philosophy of Leibniz.’’ In Heinekamp, Lenzen, and
Schneider 1990: 133–151.
—. 1994. ‘‘Did Leibniz Incline towards Monistic Pantheism in 1676?’’ In Leibniz und
Europa: VI. Internationaler Leibniz-Kongress (conference proceedings). Hannover, teil
1, 424–428.
—. 1996. ‘‘Spinoza’s Demonstration of Monism: A New Line of Defense.’’ History of
Philosophy Quarterly 13: 299–316.
—. 1999. ‘‘Leibniz’s De Summa Rerum: The Origin of the Variety of Things, in Connection with the Spinoza-Tschirnhaus Correspondence.’’ Studia Leibnitiana Supplementa 34: 69–85.
—. 2000. ‘‘Pantheism, Harmony, Unity and Multiplicity: A Radical Suggestion of
Leibniz’s De Summa Rerum.’’ In Lamarra and Palaia 2000: 97–106.
—. 2001. ‘‘Leibniz’s Early Argument That All Things Are One in Relation to Descartes’s
Notions of Real and Modal Distinction.’’ Nihil Sine Ratione: VII. Internationaler
Leibniz-Kongress (conference proceedings). Berlin, teil 2, 663–668.

Bibliography 259
Lamarra, Antonio, and Roberto Palaia (eds.). 2000. Unità e molteplicità nel pensiero ﬁlosoﬁco e scientiﬁco di Leibniz. Florence: Olschki.
Levey, Samuel. 1998. ‘‘Leibniz on Mathematics and the Actually Inﬁnite Division of
Matter.’’ Philosophical Review 107: 49–96.
—.2003. ‘‘The Interval of Motion in Leibniz’s Pacidius Philalethi.’’ Noûs 37: 371–416.
Levine, Michael P. 1990. ‘‘Divine Unity and Superﬂuous Synonymity.’’ Journal of Speculative Philosophy 4: 211–236.
—. 1992. ‘‘Monism and Pantheism.’’ Southern Journal of Philosophy 30: 95–98.
—. 1994. Pantheism: A Non-Theistic Concept of Deity. London: Routledge.
Locke, John. 1982. The Correspondence of John Locke. 8 vols. Ed. E. S. De Beer. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Lodge, Paul (ed.). 2004. Leibniz and His Correspondents. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
McGuire, J. E. 1976. ‘‘‘Labyrinthus Continui’: Leibniz on Substance, Activity, and Matter.’’
In Motion and Time, Space and Matter, ed. Peter K. Machamer and Robert G.
Turnbull. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 290–326.
McCracken, Charles J. 1983. Malebranche and British Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mancosu, Paolo. 1996. Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice in the Seventeenth Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mandelbrot, Benoit. 1982. The Fractal Geometry of Nature. New York: Freeman.
Mates, Benson. 1986. The Philosophy of Leibniz: Metaphysics and Language. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Melanchthon, Philip. 1969. Loci Communes. In Melanchthon and Bucer. Ed. Wilhelm
Pauck. Trans. Lowell J. Satre. Library of Christian Classics, vol. 19. Philadelphia: Westminister Press.
Mercer, Christia. 1999. ‘‘Leibniz and Spinoza on Substance and Mode.’’ In The Rationalists,
ed. D. Pereboom. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 273–300.
—. 2000. ‘‘God as Both the Unity and Multiplicity in the World.’’ In Lamarra and Palaia
2000: 71–95.
—. 2001. Leibniz’s Metaphysics: Its Origins and Development. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
—. 2004. ‘‘Leibniz and His Master: The Correspondence with Jakob Thomasius.’’ In
Lodge 2004.
Molina, Luis de. 1953. Liberi Arbitrii cum Gratiae Donis, Divina Praescientia, Providentia, Praedestinatione et Reprobatione Concordia. Ed. J. Rabeneck. Oña: Colegio
Máximo S. I.
Morfino, Vittorio. 1996. ‘‘Lo Spinozismo di Leibniz: Linee per una ricostruzione della storia
della questione.’’ Annali della Facoltà di Lettere e Filosoﬁa dell’Università degli Studi di
Milano 49/3: 55–81.
Murray, Michael. 1995. ‘‘Leibniz on Divine Foreknowledge of Future Contingents and
Human Freedom.’’ Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55: 75–108.
—. 1996. ‘‘Intellect, Will, and Freedom: Leibniz and His Precursors.’’ Leibniz Society
Review 6: 25–60.
—. 2000. ‘‘Critical Review of Cover and Hawthorne on Leibnizian Modality.’’ Leibniz
Review 10: 73–86.
O’Connor, Timothy (ed.). 1995. Agents, Causes, and Events. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Ovid. 1958. The Metamorphoses. Trans. Horace Gregory. New York: Viking.
Owen, H. P. 1971. Concepts of Deity. London: Macmillan.

260 Bibliography
Parkinson, G.H.R. 1965. Logic and Reality in Leibniz’s Metaphysics. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
—. 1970. Leibniz on Human Freedom. Studia Leibnitiana, Sonderheft 2. Wiesbaden:
Franz Steiner Verlag.
—. 1978. ‘‘Leibniz’s Paris Writings in Relation to Spinoza.’’ Studia Leibnitiana Supplementa 18: 73–89.
Paull, R. Cranston. 1992. ‘‘Leibniz and the Miracle of Freedom.’’ Nous 26: 218–235.
Peñaﬁel, Leonardo de. 1663. Tractatus et disputationes in primam partem D. Thomae: De
deo uno et trino. Vol. 1. Lima.
Phemister, Pauline. 1991. ‘‘Leibniz, Freedom of Will and Rationality.’’ Studia Leibnitiana
23: 25–39.
—. 1999. ‘‘Leibniz and the Elements of Compound Bodies.’’ British Journal for the
History of Philosophy 7: 57–78.
Philo. 1993. The Works of Philo. Trans. C. D. Yonge. Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson.
Plato. 1997. Complete Works. Ed. John M. Cooper. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Plotinus. 1990. Enneads. Trans. A. H. Armstrong. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Poser, Hans. 2000. ‘‘Ens et unum convertuntur: Zur Leibnizschen Einheit der Monade.’’ In
Lamarra and Palaia 2000: 271–283.
Proclus. 1963. The Elements of Theology. Ed. and trans. E. R. Dodds. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Pufendorf, Samuel. 1934. De Jure Naturae et Gentium Libri Octo. Trans. C. H. Oldfather
and W. A. Oldfather. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pyle, A. J. 1995. Atomism and Its Critics. London: Routledge.
Riley, Patrick. 1996. Leibniz’ Universal Jurisprudence: Justice as the Charity of the Wise.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Robinet, André. 1957. Correspondance Leibniz-Clarke: Présenté d’après les manuscrits originaux des bibliothèques de Hanovre et de Londres. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Ross, George MacDonald. 1984. Leibniz. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rowe, William. 1995. ‘‘Agent Causation.’’ In O’Connor 1995: 173–200.
Rozemond, Marleen. 1997. ‘‘Leibniz on the Union of Body and Soul.’’ Archiv für Geschichte
der Philosophie 79: 150–178.
Russell, Bertrand. 1900. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz, with an Appendix
of Leading Passages. London: Allen and Unwin.
—. 1913. ‘‘On the Notion of Cause.’’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 13: 1–26.
Rutherford, Donald. 1993. ‘‘Natures, Laws, and Miracles: The Roots of Leibniz’s Critique
of Occasionalism.’’ In Causation in Early Modern Philosophy, ed. Steven Nadler.
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 135–58.
—. 1995a. Leibniz and the Rational Order of Nature. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
—. 1995b. ‘‘Metaphysics: The Late Period.’’ In Jolley 1995: 124–175.
—. 1996. ‘‘Demonstration and Reconciliation: The Eclipse of the Geometrical Method
in Leibniz’s Philosophy.’’ In Leibniz’s ‘‘New System’’ (1695), ed. Roger S. Woolhouse.
Florence: Olschki, 181–201.
—. 2001. ‘‘Leibniz and the Stoics: The Consolations of Theodicy.’’ In The Problem of Evil
in Early Modern Philosophy, ed. Elmar J. Kremer and Michael J. Latzer. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 138–164.
—. 2003. ‘‘Patience sans Espérance: Leibniz’s Critique of Stoicism.’’ In Hellenistic and
Early Modern Philosophy, ed. Jon Miller and Brad Inwood. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 62–89.

Bibliography 261
—. 2004. ‘‘Idealism Declined: Leibniz and Christian Wolff.’’ In Lodge 2004.
Schepers, Heinrich. 2000. ‘‘Die Polaritäten des Einen und des Vielen im Begriff der
Monade.’’ In Lamarra and Palaia 2000: 171–184.
Schneewind, J. B. 1998. The Invention of Autonomy: A History of Modern Moral Philosophy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schneiders, Werner. 1978. ‘‘Deus subjectum: Zur Entwicklung der Leibnizschen Metaphysik.’’ Studia Leibnitiana Supplementa 18, vol. 2: 21–31.
Scotus, John Duns. 1950. Ordinatio Prologus. Opera Omnia, vol. 1. Vatican City: Typis
Polyglottis Vaticanis.
Seidler, Michael. 1985. ‘‘Freedom and Moral Therapy.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 17: 15–35.
Sleigh, R. C., Jr. 1990. Leibniz and Arnauld: A Commentary on their Correspondence. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
—. 1999. ‘‘Leibniz on Freedom and Necessity: Critical Notice of Robert Adams’s
Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, and Idealist.’’ Philosophical Review 108: 245–276.
Sleigh, R. C., Jr., Vere Chappell, and Michael Della Rocca. 1998. ‘‘Determinism and
Human Freedom.’’ In Garber and Ayers 1998, 2:1195–1278.
Sleigh, R. C., Jr., and Christia Mercer. 1995. ‘‘Metaphysics: The Early Period to the Discourse on Metaphysics.’’ In Jolley 1995: 67–123.
Sousa, Jeronimo de. 1680. Futororum contingentium Polysophia seculis decretis omnibus et
scientia media ad mentem Doctoris Subtilis. Paris.
Stahl, Daniel. 1655. Compendium Metaphysicae in XXIV Tabellas redactum. Jena.
Stein, Ludwig. 1890. Leibniz und Spinoza. Berlin: Reimer.
Stier, Johann. 1641. Praecepta Metaphysica. 2nd ed. Erfurt.
Taylor, Charles. 1964. The Explanation of Behaviour. London: Routledge.
Taylor, S. E., and S. C. Thompson. 1982. ‘‘Stalking the Elusive ‘Vividness’ Effect.’’ Psychological Review 82: 155–181.
Thomasius, Jakob. 1665. Schediasma Historicum. Leipzig.
—. 1676. Exercitatio de Stoica Mundi Exustione. Leipzig: F. Lanckisius.
Turretin, Francis. 1992. Institutes of Elenctic Theology. 3 vols. Ed. James Dennison, Jr.
Trans. George Giger. Phillipsburg, N.J.: P & R.
Vailati, Ezio. 1990. ‘‘Leibniz and Locke on Weakness of Will.’’ Journal of the History of
Philosophy 28: 213–228.
—. 1997. Leibniz and Clarke: A Study of Their Correspondence. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Van Inwagen, Peter. 1995. ‘‘When Is the Will Free?’’ In O’Connor 1995: 219–238.
Watson, Gary (ed.). 1982. Free Will. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—. 1996. ‘‘Two Faces of Responsibility.’’ Philosophical Topics 24: 226–248.
Weidling, Christian. 1696. Philosophia Juridica, qua Praecepta Logica, Metaphysica, Ethica,
Politica, ac Disputandi Artiﬁcium, Remotis otiosis Doctrinis & Spinosis Controversiis.
Leipzig.
White, Michael J. 1992. ‘‘The Foundations of the Calculus and the Conceptual Analysis of Motion: The Case of the Early Leibniz.’’ Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 73:
281–313.
Williams, Bernard. 1978. Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry. London: Penguin.
Wilson, Catherine. 1987. ‘‘De Ipsa Natura: Sources of Leibniz’s Doctrine of Force, Activity
and Natural Law.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 19: 148–172.
—. 1989. Leibniz’s Metaphysics: A Historical and Comparative Study. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wilson, Margaret (ed.). 1969. The Essential Descartes. New York: New American Library.
—. 1978. Descartes. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

262 Bibliography
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1958. The Blue and Brown Books. 2nd ed. New York and Evanston:
Harper and Row.
Woolhouse, R. S. 1988. ‘‘Leibniz and Occasionalism.’’ In Metaphysics and Philosophy of
Science in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, ed. R.S. Woolhouse. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 165–183.
—. 1993. Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz: The Concept of Substance in Seventeenth Century
Metaphysics. London: Routledge.
—. 2000. ‘‘Pre-established Harmony between Soul and Body: Union or Unity?’’ In Lamarra and Palaia 2000: 159–170.
Wright, Larry. 1976. Teleological Explanations: An Etiological Analysis of Goals and
Functions. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Index

accommodation, 9, 15, 108–19
Adams, R.M., 14, 16–17, 18 n.5, 29, 33–38, 84–87,
139–41, 206
akrasia, 148, 204, 234–35, 239, 244, 250
appetition, 138–44, 146–50, 152–54, 164–68,
170–74, 184–87, 205, 223–24, 238–40
Aquinas, T., 204–5, 239, 242, 246, 250–52
Arendt, H., 230 n.2
Aristotelianism, 55–56, 121–22, 130, 135, 219, 225,
252
Aristotle, 71, 92 n.4, 175, 192 n.4, 234, 239, 242,
248–50
Arminians, 235–36, 240
Arnauld, A., 15, 20, 44–53, 62, 65, 121, 133 n.2
Augustine, 19 n.18, 242
Bayle, P., 20, 124–25, 170–73
Bennett, J., 15–16
Bolton, M., 66 n.3
Bourke, V., 230 n.2
Boyle, R., 128–29
Bramhall, J., 198, 218
Brandom, R., 150
Calvin, J., 218, 242
causation
efﬁcient, 10–11, 15, 136–43, 150, 166, 187
ﬁnal, 10–11, 15–16, 136–43, 150, 166, 168–69,
184–85, 187, 192 n.4
Clarke, S., 128–29, 182, 186, 218, 232 n.18
compatibilism, 17, 194–96, 202, 213–14, 215 n.19,
236
compossibility, 14–15, 108–10, 117, 119
contingency, 3–4, 16, 158–59, 161–65, 175–76,
188–91, 202–4, 226–28
contingents, conditional future, 209–13

continuum, 14, 18 n.4, 70, 73–78, 80, 82–83, 85,
90–91
Cordemoy, G., 96–97
Couturat, L., 3, 18 n.2,n.5
Cover, J., 40–41 n.33, 215–16 n.27
Cudworth, R., 218, 230 n.6, 231 n.11
Davidson, J., 17–18
Deleuze, G., 120, n.7
Dennett, D., 145
Des Bosses, B., 181
Descartes, R., 5–9, 25–26, 28–29, 41 n.41, 69–70,
73–75, 89, 112, 121–22, 125, 129, 135, 137–38,
237, 239
determinism, 17, 141–42, 182, 185, 189–92, 196, 214,
229, 251
causal, 191, 201, 213, 217
psychological, 17, 200–8
De Volder, B., 130–32
distinction, 13, 23, 36–38
modal, 25, 28–31, 35–38, 43 n.70
real, 13, 25, 27–38
Dole, L., 212–13
Dominicans, 209–10, 223, 225, 235
Eckhard, A., 23–26
entelechy, 90, 160, 163–66
Epicurus, 5, 96
error, 18, 234, 242–43, 251
expression, 3, 14–15, 84–85, 87, 96, 100–5, 108–17,
123
extension, 8, 14, 69–70, 73–74, 81–87, 89–90,
99–100, 126, 128
Fardella, M., 97, 106
Ficino, M., 54–57, 63–64, 67 n.8

263

264 Index
force
derivative, 131–32, 163–65
primitive, 15, 89, 99–100, 163–65
Franciscans, 203–4
Freddoso, A., 219
freedom, 4, 12, 16–18, 141–42, 156–60, 174–77,
181–82, 185–92, 194–214, 217–29, 235–40,
242–44, 246–47, 250–51

Levey, S., 14
Levine, M., 22
Levy-Bruhl, L., 121, 124
libertarianism, 194–96, 201, 204, 207, 211, 213–14,
235–37, 240, 251
Locke, J., 126, 147–49, 218, 230 n.6, 244–45, 248
Luther, M., 242, 253 n.14
Lutherans, 218, 235, 242

Garber, D., 14
Garrett, D., 232–33 n.24
God, 6, 32–33, 118–19, 120 n.6, 136–38, 147, 184,
191, 194–96, 215 n.12, 235–37, 247–49
and causation, 7–9, 121, 131–33, 133 n.3, 142
and choice, 5, 9, 127–29, 181, 185, 187–89
and mind, 11, 55–57, 59, 63
as one and many, 21–27, 31–37, 42 n.53
and sin, 17, 196, 208–14, 236
Granado, D., 182, 192 n.9, 203
Greenberg, S., 17–18
Grua, G., 181

Malebranche, N., 7–9, 15, 121–25, 127–28, 133, 133 n.3
matter, 5–7, 10–11, 14, 70, 73, 75–76, 78, 80, 82,
89–90, 95–106, 126, 128, 130
mechanism, 4, 99, 135–38, 140–42, 145–47
Melanchthon, P., 235
Mercer, C., 13–14, 27, 33, 35–38, 39 n.16, 42 n.52
mind, 7–9, 14, 52–53, 100–1, 105–6, 142–43,
191–92, 217–18, 223–29
miracle, 7, 15, 121–22, 124–27, 129, 133
Molina, L. de, 17, 202, 218, 222–23
Molinism, 17, 218–29, 236–37, 240
monads, 9–11, 16, 22–23, 84–85, 95, 98–99, 130–33,
138–52, 163–68, 170–74, 184–85, 223, 238
monism, 9, 13, 21–28, 31–34, 37–38, 39–40 n.25, 40
n.26, n.31, n.32
motion, 7–8, 11, 14–15, 69–92, 102–4, 112–16, 131,
184, 187–88
Murray, M., 16–17, 182, 186, 230 n.3

happiness, 12–13, 242, 245–46, 248–49, 252
Hare, R.M., 154
harmony, 6, 9–16, 19 n.14, 76, 108–11, 115–19
of kingdoms of nature and grace, 11–13
preestablished, 3, 7–8, 10, 14–15, 46, 67 n.23,
109, 132–33, 141–43, 145–46, 159–61, 167, 170,
174–76, 184, 186, 197–98, 228
universal, 9, 20–21, 108–9, 135, 167
Hawthorne, J., 40–41 n.33, 215–16 n.27
Hobbes, T., 4–5, 19 n.9, 168, 183, 218, 230 n.6
Hume, D., 124, 133 n.4, 243, 253 n.17
idealism, 11, 14, 19 n.17, 69, 84–85, 87, 91–92,
95–106
identity, 3, 7, 9, 13, 18 n.5, 22–27, 36, 46–56, 58,
61–62, 65
indifference, 17, 218–21, 223, 235–36
intellectualism, 18, 202–4, 214–15 n.10, 234–39, 242,
244, 250
Jalabert, J., 109–10
Jesuits, 17, 181–82, 203, 205–7, 209–11, 213, 218, 223,
225, 235–36
Jolley, N., 14–15
justice, divine, 5–6, 12–13, 19 n.10, 236
Kant, I., 11–12, 156–57, 185, 228, 232 n.22, 242, 244
King, W., 220
Knebel, S., 182
Kulstad, M., 13
Lamy, F., 125, 215 n.19
laws
moral, 16, 184–85, 187, 201
natural, 6–8, 15, 115–16, 122–29, 185, 187–88

naturalism, 5–7, 9, 12
nature, 6–9, 12, 15, 78–83, 85, 87–89, 91, 125–27,
186, 188–89, 191–92
necessitarianism, 3, 127, 129, 203–7
necessity
metaphysical, 16, 158, 176, 181–82, 186–91,
196–97, 203–4, 206, 208, 226–27
moral, 16–17, 181–92, 196, 201, 203–8, 213–14
physical, 182–83, 186–87, 196, 201–4, 206–8,
213–14
nominalism, 20–21
noncontradiction, principle of, 186, 190–91
occasionalism, 7–9, 15, 121–33
organism, 10, 136–37, 140, 142
pantheism, 13, 21–28, 31–38, 39–40 n.25, 40 n.31
Parkinson, G.H.R., 18 n.4, 23–24, 26, 34
Pelagianism, 236–37
perception, 9, 20, 80–82, 85, 88, 105, 138–42, 146,
150–53, 169, 171–74, 199–200, 205, 223–28
perfection, 15–16, 95, 100, 102–4, 183, 200, 206, 238,
240
Plato, 53–54, 56–57, 61, 65, 234–35, 242, 248
Platonism, 14, 36–37, 45, 53–57, 63–65, 66 n.4–5
Plotinus, 55–56, 66 n.6
Poser, H., 20
possible worlds, best of all, 5, 9–10, 13, 116, 184,
189, 242

Index 265
Proclus, 55–56
Pufendorf, S., 218
realism, 14, 69, 74, 84–92, 105–6
reason, 11–12, 16–18, 141–42, 148, 150–54, 158, 169,
173, 205, 213, 235–41, 243–51
Reformed theology, 195–96, 208, 235–36
Ruiz de Montoya, D., 182, 203
Russell, B., 3, 18 n.5, 121–22
Rutherford, D., 16, 125, 134 n.6
Schepers, H., 21
Schneewind, J.B., 228, 231 n.8, 233 n.24
scholasticism, 66 n.1, 73, 82, 106, 121, 129–30, 220,
223, 226, 229, 238–39
Scotus, J.D., 202
shape
fractal, 14, 76–77, 84, 86–89, 91
precise, 14, 69–92
sin, 17–18, 208–10, 236–38, 242–243, 246, 251
Sleigh, R.C., 13–15, 44–53, 58, 61–62, 65, 66 n.2,
67–68 n.25, 84, 87–88, 91, 107 n.7, 108–11, 115,
123, 206–7, 222
Snell, W., 137–38
Socrates, 53–54, 234–35, 242
soul, 5–6, 8–11, 45, 51–57, 62–64, 103–6, 159–60,
166–74, 234–35, 238
Sousa, J. de, 204, 207
Spinoza, B., 3–9, 12–13, 21–22, 25, 31, 40 n.31,
109, 119, 125, 129, 131, 140–41, 156, 158,
183, 206
spontaneity, 13, 16–17, 49–52, 58, 156–77, 195–201,
208, 213–14, 226–27, 236, 240
agent, 16, 157, 159–61, 168–74, 176–77
monadic, 16, 157, 159–68, 171, 173, 175–76
Stoics, 5–6, 19 n.10, n.18, 244
Suárez, F., 129, 218–22, 224–28, 230–31 n.7, 231
n.10, 232 n.22

substance, 8–9, 11, 13–15, 22–23, 25–33, 44–66,
95–106, 108–13, 115–19, 122–23, 131–32, 159–65,
175–76, 185–86, 196–97, 199–201, 207, 214
corporeal, 10–11, 13–14, 20, 38 n.2, 46, 48, 52,
55–56, 60, 62, 69–70, 73, 84–91, 95, 97–99,
101, 103–106, 142
created, 7, 15, 102, 121, 127, 238
simple, 9–11, 20, 84, 91, 95, 98, 105, 115, 131–32,
184–85, 187, 197, 226–28
sufﬁcient reason, principle of, 3, 17, 134 n.6,
190–92, 211–12, 221–23, 225
superintrinsicalness, 49–52, 58
teleology, 15–16, 136–50, 153, 166–71, 173–74,
238–40
theodicy, 5, 12, 236
Thomasius, J., 66 n. 5
truth, 3–4, 11, 16, 188–92, 209–13, 235, 238, 243,
247–48
Turretin, F., 195–96, 236–37
union, hypostatic, 14, 59–62
unity, 13–14, 20–22, 25, 35–36, 44–66, 96–97
Vailati, E., 126, 129, 232 n.18
Van Inwagen, P., 217
Van Limborch, P., 235
voluntarism, 127, 129, 202–3, 235–37
Watson, G., 229 n.1
will, 16–17, 123, 148–49, 156–57, 159–60, 168–70,
172, 174–77, 196, 201–14, 217–29, 234–52
divine, 17, 125–26, 128, 173, 209–12, 214
Wilson, C., 14–15
wisdom, divine, 7, 127, 134 n.8
Wittgenstein, L., 120, n.5
Woolhouse, R.S., 122
Wright, L., 137

